The Project Gutenberg eBook of Darwin
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Darwin

Author: Gamaliel Bradford

Release date: May 19, 2023 [eBook #70803]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1926

Credits: Bob Taylor, Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DARWIN ***
Cover

By Gamaliel Bradford

DARWIN. Illustrated.
A NATURALIST OF SOULS.
THE SOUL OF SAMUEL PEPYS. Illustrated.
DAMAGED SOULS. Illustrated.
AMERICAN PORTRAITS. Illustrated.
A PROPHET OF JOY.
PORTRAITS OF AMERICAN WOMEN. Illustrated.
PORTRAITS OF WOMEN. Illustrated.
UNION PORTRAITS. Illustrated.
CONFEDERATE PORTRAITS. Illustrated.
LEE THE AMERICAN. Illustrated.
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

BOSTON AND NEW YORK

DARWIN

Ch. Darwin (signature)

DARWIN

BY
GAMALIEL BRADFORD

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS


Decoration


BOSTON AND NEW YORK
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
The Riverside Press Cambridge
1926
COPYRIGHT, 1926, BY GAMALIEL BRADFORD

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The Riverside Press

CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS

PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.
TO
MARSHALL LIVINGSTON PERRIN
WHO TAUGHT ME TO WRITE
AND TO THINK
On se lasse de tout sauf de comprendre
Sainte-Beuve (from Virgil?)
CONTENTS
I.	The Observer	3
II.	The Thinker	44
III.	The Discoverer	83
IV.	The Loser	128
V.	The Lover	168
VI.	The Destroyer	208
VII.	The Scientific Spirit	248
Index	307
ILLUSTRATIONS
Charles Darwin	Frontispiece
Photograph taken in 1881 by Elliott & Fry, London, reproduced in More Letters of Charles Darwin	
Charles Darwin as a Child with his Sister Catherine	4
From a chalk drawing reproduced in Emma Darwin: A Century of Family Letters	
The Beagle Laid Ashore for Repairs at River Santa Cruz, Patagonia	14
From Life and Letters of Charles Darwin	
Down House from the Garden	44
From a woodcut in The Century Magazine reproduced in Life and Letters	
Facsimile of a Page from a Notebook of 1837	88
From Life and Letters	
The Study at Down	128
From a woodcut in The Century Magazine reproduced in Life and Letters	
Emma Darwin at Thirty-One	190
From the portrait painted by George Richmond, R.A., reproduced in Emma Darwin	
Charles Darwin about 1854	248
Photograph by Maull & Fox, reproduced in More Letters	
[Pg 1]

[Pg 2]

DARWIN

CHRONOLOGY
CHARLES ROBERT DARWIN

Born, Shrewsbury, February 12, 1809.

At Edinburgh University, 1826.

At Cambridge, 1827-1831.

Absent with the Beagle, 1831-1836.

Married Emma Wedgwood, January 29, 1839.

Settled at Down, in Kent, 1842.

‘The Origin of Species’ published, November 24, 1859.

‘The Descent of Man’ published, February 24, 1871.

Died, Down, April 19, 1882.

[Pg 3]

DARWIN

Decoration
CHAPTER I
THE OBSERVER
I
Any formal life of Darwin should be written by a thoroughly trained and equipped scientist, and indeed no such life could be better than that written by Darwin’s son forty years ago. But one who, without special scientific qualifications, is profoundly interested in the characters and souls of men, all men, may perhaps be justified in making an intimate study of a man whose influence upon other men, for good and evil both, has been enormous, and who was himself one of the simplest, purest, noblest, most candid, most lovable, most Christian souls that ever lived.

By an extraordinary coincidence Charles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, England, on the same day, February 12, 1809, on which Abraham Lincoln was born in Hardin County, Kentucky. Darwin belonged to an excellent old English family on his father’s side and his mother was one of the[Pg 4] Wedgwoods, of ceramic fame. His paternal grandfather, Erasmus, was a physician, a poet, and a scientist. Darwin’s father was an able and successful physician. He would have liked his son to be the same, but the son had not the taste for it. Failing medicine, the church was considered, but seemed equally unpromising. Education at Edinburgh and at Cambridge did not yield very much. In those days the classics were the basis and this boy had little interest in the classics. He liked field sports and outdoor life. Above all, he liked animals and plants, liked to observe and to describe them, and to record his observations, and this interest grew more and more absorbing.


CHARLES DARWIN AS A CHILD
With his sister Catherine

In 1831, at the age of twenty-two, Darwin obtained the position of naturalist on the government ship, Beagle, and for five years he was absent from England, exploring the southern hemisphere and carefully recording his observations on every sort of scientific subject, which were later published in his printed journal. Soon after his return home, he married his cousin, Emma Wedgwood, a noble and charming woman, and a little later, in 1842, he settled at the small village of Down, in the county of Kent, and made his home there until his death in 1882. He inherited a considerable property, which [Pg 5]was later increased from his books. He had a large family of sons and daughters, ten in all, and his life was half chronic invalidism and half intense devotion to scientific study and thought, or rather, the two elements were inextricably intertwined.

As a result of his observations on the Beagle, Darwin became possessed with the idea, which of course had occurred to various thinkers before him, from the Greeks to Lamarck, that life had not been created in distinct manifold forms, but had developed in all its variety, including even man, from a few forms, or even from one. To entertain the idea in the abstract was comparatively simple; but to explain the process of development was the puzzle, until Darwin hit upon what seemed to him the clue in what he called ‘natural selection,’ or, as Spencer termed it, ‘the survival of the fittest.’ For twenty years Darwin patiently worked out experimental proof of this theory, and then in 1859 he published ‘The Origin of Species,’ a book which is generally admitted to be one of the most important in the whole history of science. During the remaining twenty years of his life he devoted himself to endless further experiment, and the results were embodied in numerous volumes, chief among which was ‘The Descent of Man.’ His views were from[Pg 6] the first the subject of fierce controversy, and in many details they are still so, and will continue to be. But it may safely be said that in the scientific world the evolution of life, or more technically, modification by descent, which is so inseparably associated with Darwin’s name, is an accepted principle, and Darwin himself had the great and satisfying triumph of living until this acceptance was perceived to be general, if not universal. He was buried in Westminster Abbey, close to the last resting-place of Newton.

The basis, or at any rate one of the most fundamental elements of Darwin’s character, was the instinct and habit of observing the external world, and we can best approach him by considering this habit in others and in him. It is astonishing how little most of us see. We live in a world of shadows and dream outlines, piecing out reality by convenient abstractions, which pass in memory like worn current counters, with little resemblance to actual fact. A tree to us is vaguely a tree: the structure of its bark, the shape of its leaves do not enter our world. A man and a woman are simply—a man and a woman. Unless we are specially called upon to do so we do not note details of feature or gesture or garment. This vagueness, this abstraction of[Pg 7] vision, is what Théophile Gautier referred to in his celebrated phrase, ‘I am a man for whom the visible world exists.’[1] And he amplified his idea by saying that of twenty-five persons who come into a room, twenty-four will go out and not be able to tell you the color of the wall-paper, whereas he could tell that and pretty much everything else. To such an observing temperament life is a matter of visual detail, of sensuous detail of every kind.

There are people who look out and people who look in, and of course there are all sorts of degrees between the two extremes. Some people are wholly preoccupied with their own inner life, their thoughts, their emotions, their experiences. It is only by the pressure of necessity that they force themselves into connection with the world about them, and then it is under protest, and their thoughts leap back, as by a spring, to internal matters, as soon as the pressure is removed. Others live in the swift, diverting movement of the external world and lose their own destiny and almost their identity in the play of it. ‘Let me alone to observe till I turn myself into nothing but observation,’ says the old poet.[2] The observation may be for a serious scientific purpose. It may be for endless entertainment and pure, inexhaustible delight. As Sterne[Pg 8] has it: ‘What a large volume of adventures may be grasped within this little span of life by him who interests his heart in everything and who, having eyes to see what time and chance are perpetually holding out to him as he journeyeth on his way, misses nothing he can fairly lay his hands on.’[3]

As there are some persons who naturally observe, so there are some who observe certain things, and not others. Women are apt to be more acute observers than men: their senses are more keen and their minds less preoccupied. But their vision is usually limited to the things that interest them. A woman will go into a friend’s house and tell you every detail of furnishing, will describe the friend’s dress with finished minuteness. But she may take a walk through the fields and not be able to remember a single flower or insect. On the other hand, very great scientists will not miss a spider in the grass, but the color of a ribbon may escape them.

From another point of view observation may be deliberately exclusive. A trained observer may find that general vision distracts him, and that to follow up his special object it is necessary to put all other sights and sounds out of consideration entirely. Bradford Torrey used to say, and no doubt it is the[Pg 9] experience of all naturalists, that if he went to look for a special flower, he saw flowers only, and was quite oblivious to birds, while on bird days a rare blossom might be passed unnoticed.

Naturally the most common matter of observation, the one which is more or less forced upon the attention of all of us, is humanity. We may be indifferent to trees and stones, but our pleasure, our labor, our existence depend upon a more or less constant study of the human beings whose existence interlocks at every point with ours. Therefore, from the earliest times of record there have been profound observers of humanity, persons who have examined the human aspect and the human heart, as read through that aspect, with the most persistent zeal and the most unwearying delight. In the vivid phrase of one of the most acute of these, ‘I glutted myself with observation.’ And even those of less gormandizing tendency find the analysis of the human subject one of the most inexhaustible pleasures that this world affords. All through the study of Darwin I shall have occasion to refer to one of Darwin’s contemporaries who in a different line of research was an equally brilliant and significant exemplification of the scientific spirit, Sainte-Beuve. As Darwin devoted years upon[Pg 10] years to patient investigation of the secrets of the natural world, so Sainte-Beuve with the same patience, the same labor, the same infinite and ever-varied curiosity, probed human hearts, all sorts of human hearts, and portrayed them with unfailing accuracy and sympathy. He said of himself, using the strictly scientific expression: ‘I analyze, I herborize, I am a naturalist of souls.’[4]

But in dealing with Darwin we are in the main concerned with the field of so-called natural science, with the varying aspects of the material world, which we are apt to sum up under the term, nature. General observation of this world is, of course, also as old as man. Greek, Hebrew, Egyptian, all ancient records, contain scientific facts of importance and interest to-day. Sophocles and Vergil had an exquisite sense of the exact beauty of birds and flowers. The vision of Chaucer and Shakespeare was as acute as that of Gautier, so far as they chose to employ it. At the same time we must recognize that with the middle of the eighteenth century a new interest in nature arose. The literature of Rousseau and Cowper, of Keats and George Sand, reflected the external world in a far different fashion from anything before imagined, and Linnæus, Cuvier, and many others laid[Pg 11] the foundations of modern scientific study, which the nineteenth century developed until it overshadowed every branch of learning both for theoretical abundance and for practical utility.

It must of course be recognized that in many cases the observation of nature is not practiced for the pure pleasure of it, but serves some ulterior object or interest. There is first the obvious practical gain from such observation. Agriculture has undergone a complete revolution in the last hundred years, and this revolution has been brought about by the various developments of scientific research. Darwin’s vast investigations showed the intimate connection between the theories of the scientist and the practical experiments of the breeder.

On the other side there is the observation of the artist. Ruskin pointed out long ago, how fine, how subtle, how delicate was the vision of the great painters, how perfect their skill in rendering the exact sense impression of natural objects. In the same way, it is not often considered what wealth of accurate record we have in the poets and novelists. Gautier, for whom the visible world existed, was a poet. He saw shapes and contours and colors, saw them to render them in words that[Pg 12] interpreted as perfectly as words can. The great French novelists who followed Gautier and learned from him were in the same way admirable observers and recorders. Darwin himself did not scorn to use the observation of the English novelist Mrs. Oliphant and he refers to her as ‘an excellent observer.’[5]

But there is such a thing as observation for the pure love of it, which is used neither to improve the breed of chickens or tomatoes, nor to make effective and salable copy, nor even to generate and sustain theories about the organization of the cosmos. There is a pure, inexhaustible delight in just living with the insects and the birds, in merging one’s own existence, one’s own soul in the mysterious abundance and ecstasy of the universal life, without thought of any ulterior object to be achieved in any way whatsoever. White of Selborne felt nature in this fashion. So did Richard Jefferies. So did the French naturalist and observer, Fabre. I know few works that have more of the charm of personal delight than Bates’s ‘Naturalist on the Amazons,’ a book which I have read and re-read and shall read again. Bates was interested in the Darwinian theories and worked at them. But his passion for the forest life was quite independent of[Pg 13] any theories and it is expressed with an engaging, absolute simplicity, without the slightest pretence at literary ornament or effect.

Our supreme American example of this life in nature, and perhaps the supreme example anywhere, is Henry Thoreau. Thoreau had his speculations, and some persons relish them. But it seems as if no other human being had ever left the record of such complete self-abnegation in the external world as Thoreau’s. His soul not only turns to that of the birds and flowers, it is that of the birds and flowers, and he is never, never making observations to serve a purpose. He is simply existing in the universal existence for the joy of it: ‘I have given myself up to nature; I have lived so many springs and summers and autumns and winters as if I had nothing else to do but live them, and imbibe whatever nutriment they had for me; I have spent a couple of years, for instance, with the flowers chiefly, having none other so binding engagement as to observe when they opened; I could have afforded to spend a whole fall observing the changing tints of the foliage. Ah, how I have thriven on solitude and poverty!’[6]

[Pg 14]

II
Of the numerous records of simple natural observation and experience few are more charming than Darwin’s ‘Journal of the Voyage of the Beagle,’ in which he notes what he saw and heard by land and sea during those years of adventure in the southern hemisphere. All through this book, as indeed in all his books, it is evident that the instinct and habit of observing were inborn and constant, and all those who write about Darwin make this instinct at least the foundation of his scientific eminence.


THE BEAGLE LAID ASHORE FOR REPAIRS AT RIVER SANTA CRUZ, PATAGONIA

Asa Gray, who had given his life to botany, writes: ‘What a skill and genius you have for these researches! Even for the structure of the flower of the Ophyrideæ I have to-night learned more than I ever knew before.’[7] Professor Osborn says, more generally: ‘Rare as were his reasoning powers, his powers of observation were of a still more distinct order. He persistently and doggedly followed every clue; he noticed little things which escaped others; he always noted exceptions and at once jotted down facts opposed to his theories.’[8] And the editors of Darwin’s letters put the whole matter with concise effectiveness in speaking of ‘that supreme power of seeing and thinking what the rest of the world [Pg 15]had overlooked, which was one of his most striking characteristics.’[9]

Darwin’s own comments on observation are frequent and most interesting. Little inclined as he was to self-praise, in the charming autobiographical sketch which begins the ‘Life,’ he frankly states his merits in this regard: ‘I think that I am superior to the common run of men in noticing things which easily escape attention, and in observing them carefully. My industry has been nearly as great as it could have been in the observation and collection of facts.’[10] Exact, systematic, patient study of what is actually seen seems to him the basis of all great scientific work, and he repeatedly emphasizes the importance of it. ‘It is well to remember that Naturalists value observations far more than reasoning.’[11] Again, ‘I have come not to care at all for general beliefs without the special facts. I have suffered too often from this.’[12] And observation is not only a duty, it is a delight. The arrangement of facts, the deduction of theories from them, thought, reasoning, argument, these are labor and pain. But to watch the insects and the flowers, by long and careful attention to make them yield all their secrets, this is no labor, but an exquisite diversion, which never fails: ‘A naturalist’s life would be a[Pg 16] happy one if he had only to observe, and never to write.’[13]

It is evident, further, that Darwin’s observation was by no means confined to natural science, but was quick, acute, and constant in all the different phases and interests of life. Naturally his books deal with little besides his scientific work, but the record of the Beagle shows interest and appreciation of many things outside of this work altogether. An eye so carefully trained could not fail to distinguish and perceive all sorts of minute points that others would pass over. His readiness to note other things besides those he was looking for shows in the piquant comment on wide experimenting: ‘It may turn out a mare’s nest, but I have often incidentally observed curious facts when making what I call “a fool’s experiment.”’[14]

It is especially curious to note Darwin’s observation of himself. To be sure, he disclaims any philosophical study in this regard: ‘I have never tried looking into my own mind.’[15] Nevertheless, whether he tried or not, he was curiously alive to what went on there, and he records what he finds with the singular candor which appears in his treatment of his own affairs as well as of others. The very hesitation with which he speaks of self-analysis[Pg 17] increases the value of his results: ‘If I can analyze my own feelings (a very doubtful process).’[16] And when he does make a statement, it is all the more reliable and all the more far-reaching from the moderation and reserve with which it is advanced.

In one field quite remote from what is usually considered natural science, that of physiognomy and expression, Darwin’s observation is especially interesting, though of course he connected this line of research, as so many others, with his general scientific theory. His book on ‘The Expression of the Emotions’ is one of the most entertaining and profitable of all for the general reader, and it is instructive to note, how early, how persistently, and how faithfully he collected memoranda on this comparatively collateral issue. The use of what was immediately about him, of his own personal experience in daily living, is especially significant in this regard. For the study of expression he felt that unconsciousness in the subject was a prime requisite. Hence the study of infants, who were perfectly indifferent to your investigations, was peculiarly profitable, and almost from the moment his children were born, Darwin began to make notes on their expressions of pain and pleasure, all the little[Pg 18] subtle indications of desire and need, which mothers use instinctively but which fathers are not commonly apt to register as scientific data. The curious paper, published in Mind, called ‘The Biography of a Child,’ gives many of Darwin’s notes on this subject, and repeated references in ‘The Expression of the Emotions’ show what fruitful use he made of those notes at a later period. The minuteness with which he observed and reflected is well shown in this passage on childrens’ crying: ‘I ought to have thought of crying children rubbing their eyes with their knuckles, but I did not think of it, and cannot explain it. As far as my memory serves, they do not do so whilst roaring, in which case compression would be of no use.... I wish I knew more about the knuckles and crying.’[17]

The observation not only records the larger and more violent manifestations of passion, but is constantly on the watch for those trifling signs of feeling which appear and flit away in trivial social intercourse. Take this account of an animated conversation: ‘Another young lady and a youth, both in the highest spirits, were eagerly talking together with extraordinary rapidity; and I noticed that, as often as the young lady was beaten, and could not get out her words fast enough, her eyebrows[Pg 19] went obliquely upwards, and rectangular furrows were formed on her forehead. She thus each time hoisted a flag of distress; and this she did half-a-dozen times in the course of a few minutes.’[18]

Nor is he content with his own observations, but in this, as in wider researches, he perpetually appeals to his friends for assistance, opens their eyes and sharpens their wits, to see and record matters which they would assuredly never have thought of for themselves. Note the care and tact with which he makes his requests: ‘I beg you, in relation to a new point for observation, to imagine as well as you can that you suddenly come across some dreadful object, and act with a sudden little start, a shudder of horror; please do this once or twice, and observe yourself as well as you can, and afterwards read the rest of this note, which I have consequently pinned down.’[19]

It is, however, in the regions of natural science more particularly so-called that Darwin’s observation is inexhaustibly rich, varied, exciting, and suggestive. He himself puts it very simply and effectively, when he says, ‘I was born a naturalist.’[20] At the age of ten his curiosity was intensely stimulated by the varying aspects of insects and he considered[Pg 20] the desirability of collecting them. In one of his letters, Darwin gives an amusing illustration of this youthful enthusiasm for collecting. One day he had caught two most interesting beetles and was holding one in each hand, when he discovered a third, ‘a sacred Panagæus crux-major!’ ‘I could not bear to give up either of my Carabi, and to lose Panagæus was out of the question; so that in despair I gently seized one of the Carabi between my teeth, when to my unspeakable disgust and pain the little inconsiderate beast squirted his acid down my throat, and I lost both Carabi and Panagæus.’[21]

The delight of observation, which began in childhood, continued to old age, and increased instead of weakening. When he was fatigued and worn with writing and theorizing, when illness tormented him and weakness rendered more concentrated effort impossible, it was a relief to turn to the simple contemplation of facts, and the budding and fading of flowers and the varied activity of insects offered at all times diversion and contentment. Sometimes he dwells upon the larger aspects of such contemplation, the joy of discovery, the excitement of finding what has never been found before. Again and again in his southern voyages this excitement appears: ‘In these wild countries it gives[Pg 21] much delight to gain the summit of any mountain. There is an indefinite expectation of seeing something very strange, which, however often it may be balked, never failed with me to recur on each successive attempt.’[22] Or the pleasure may come in what seem the humblest, smallest things, in what is to ordinary persons negligible, or even repulsive. One of Darwin’s most attractive books, perhaps with ‘The Expression of the Emotions,’ the most attractive from the casual reader’s standpoint, is that in which he gathers together the results of his study of earthworms, a study which had continued through years of patient and thoughtful investigation of a subject which, even from the naturalist’s point of view, would not seem one of the most fruitful or engaging.

The fundamental principal of all scientific observation is accuracy, and no one knew this better than Darwin. No one understood better than he the subtle, treacherous influences that are always at work, distracting, impairing, and distorting exact and lucid vision. There is the danger of seeing what we are accustomed to see and therefore think we see. There is the danger of seeing what others have seen and described before us. There is the supreme danger of seeing what we wish to see, what[Pg 22] accords with some preconceived theory or dogma. Against all these dangers Darwin tried to be ever on his guard, and he is constantly warning others of them and emphasizing the importance of pure accuracy and the enormous difficulty of it. ‘Good heavens, how difficult accuracy is!’[23] Among all the merits of the scientist he values accuracy highest, the instinct and the ability to record facts correctly: ‘I value praise for accurate observation far higher than for any other quality.’[24] And especially in one admirable passage he stresses and reiterates both the difficulty and the value: ‘Accuracy is the soul of Natural History. It is hard to become accurate; he who modifies a hair’s breadth will never be accurate.... Absolute accuracy is the hardest merit to attain, and the highest merit.’[25]

Among the various elements of accuracy, that of statement, as well as of observation, is of course of the utmost importance, yet is too apt to be overlooked. Even those who are careful in their actual observing, may in their report of their observations be much less so. Words are misleading and inadequate things, and the tricks they have played with scientific accuracy have been deplorable. There is the strange ease of mere misstatement. There is the natural tendency to overstate. There is the[Pg 23] tendency to clarify verbally what in fact is more or less confused or the opposite difficulty of making verbally clear what the senses may perceive with singular lucidity.

Here again Darwin is constantly on the watch. Memory is misleading and accounts based upon it are apt to be untrustworthy: ‘I foolishly trusted to my memory, and was much annoyed to find how hasty and inaccurate many of my remarks were.’[26] Words are inadequate, blundering, they will not render the finer, more delicate shades: ‘A difference may be clearly perceived, and yet it may be impossible, at least I have found it so, to state in what the difference consists.’[27] One cannot be too careful, too scrupulous, about one’s statements, or too anxious to correct them, when one has made a mistake. And Darwin gets up in the middle of the night and arouses a slumbering friend to explain that, after all, he felt the sense of the sublime more fully in the forests of Brazil than on the top of the Cordilleras.[28]

When one is so mistrustful of one’s own records one cannot always accept implicitly the narratives of others. Darwin is eager to get the accounts of other observers, and is singularly deferential to their opinions. At the same time he is gently and[Pg 24] watchfully critical, and knows well how to estimate the ability of those with whom he deals. One of the most interesting remarks upon the skill of his methods in obtaining information, and one that every one who reads him carefully will confirm, is Sir William Turner’s comment upon ‘his care in avoiding leading questions.’[29]

And if Darwin was insistent upon accuracy in records, he was also extraordinarily thorough and exact in mathematical matters and measurement. He speaks of abstract mathematics as having been one of the neglected elements of his education,[30] but he shunned no amount of pains and toil in calculating, wherever he felt it necessary to work out his results. In his books which record the investigation of detail there is an almost incredible amount of slow and careful research involving exact counting and weighing and measuring. ‘I was compelled to count under the microscope above 20,000 seeds of Lythrum salicaria,’ he says casually in one instance,[31] and there are innumerable others of the same kind. In all these calculations the possibility of error haunts him and he does his best to eliminate it, yet still the possibility is there: ‘Although I always am endeavoring to be cautious and to mistrust myself, yet I know well how apt I am[Pg 25] to make blunders.’[32] If he blundered, what shall be said of some of us? Most interesting and characteristic is the trait, pointed out by his son, that he assumed with singular naïveté the absolute accuracy of the instruments that came to him: ‘He had great faith in instruments, and I do not think it naturally occurred to him to doubt the accuracy of a scale or measuring glass.’[33] Yet further, ‘it was characteristic of him that he took scrupulous pains in making measurements with his somewhat rough scales.’[34]

As he was exact and particular in calculation and measurement, so he shrank from no amount of detail, did not hesitate to carry his investigations to the last point of minuteness, whenever the full and solid breadth of result demanded it. Apparently nothing escaped him. It was not only what he was looking for, but he noted and seized oddities and exceptions for their larger bearing and for future profit. As his son says, ‘A point apparently slight and unconnected with his present work is passed over by many a man almost unconsciously with some half-considered explanation, which is in fact no explanation. It was just these things that he seized on to make a start from.’[35] Thus, on any subject that came up, his memory or his notes[Pg 26] could almost always be appealed to. As Sir Thomas Farrer puts it, ‘What interested me was to see that on this as on almost any other point of detailed observation, Mr. Darwin could always say, “Yes, but at one time I made some observations myself on this particular point; and I think you will find, etc., etc.”’[36]

To appreciate this minuteness and thoroughness, it is necessary to examine the less known and less popular books, such as the ‘Cross and Self Fertilization’ and the ‘Different Forms of Flowers.’ In these one is overwhelmed with Darwin’s persistence in examining and noting trivial details. And perhaps most impressive of all is to turn over the pages of the two immensely solid volumes on Cirripedes. For many years Darwin devoted himself to the study of these unexciting barnacles, sometimes wearying, sometimes rebelling, but always keeping at his task until he had completed it. He himself sometimes wondered whether such prolonged toil at mere description was wholly worth while; but Huxley believed that the mental discipline was of the greatest possible profit to Darwin’s later work. In any case the exhaustive thoroughness of it is indeed exemplary. How far this goes may be suggested by one quotation out of many:[Pg 27] ‘I cannot too strongly impress on any one intending to study this class, not to trust to external characters; he must separate and clean and carefully examine the internal structure and form of the compartments and more especially of the opercular valves.’[37] And the examination, in Darwin’s case, applied to hundreds of specimens of minute barnacles gathered and sent to him from all parts of the world.

It is hardly necessary to emphasize the enormous amount of labor implied and involved in all these self-imposed tasks of Darwin. Although circumstances compelled him to give a large part of his life to repose, he was by nature a worker. It is true that he sometimes speaks jokingly of his idleness: ‘I have been of late shamefully idle, i.e., observing instead of writing, and how much better fun observing is than writing.’[38] But as Huxley well points out, Darwin generally means by idleness ‘working hard at something he likes when he ought to be occupied with a less attractive subject.’[39] And Darwin’s own more serious comment is, ‘I am a pretty man to preach, for I cannot be idle, much as I wish it, and am never comfortable except when at work.’[40] He complains of fatigue, he forces himself to seek recreation, relaxation; but[Pg 28] even when his body is at rest, his mind tends to work, refuses to stop working, finds its only real relief in change of occupation and thought.

And as the labor is impressive, so is the patience. The man was naturally nervous, restless, eager. He wanted results, like the rest of us. Yet after he had conceived a theory which he thought destined to subvert the whole realm of science, he waited twenty years for the thorough observation and testing necessary to put the theory into even tentative form. Of all the great scientific qualities perhaps patience is the most essential and the most difficult, and surely patience never had a more supreme exemplar than Charles Darwin. Sometimes even his enduring persistence is temporarily shaken: ‘My cirripedial task is an eternal one; I make no perceptible progress. I am sure that they belong to the hour-hand, and I groan under my task.’[41] But though he may groan, he never yields. As his son admirably says of him: ‘He used almost to apologize for his patience, saying that he could not bear to be beaten, as if this were rather a sign of weakness on his part.... Perseverance seems hardly to express his almost fierce desire to force the truth to reveal itself. He often said that it was important that a man should know the right point[Pg 29] at which to give up an inquiry. And I think it was his tendency to pass this point that inclined him to apologize for his perseverance, and gave the air of doggedness to his work.’[42] The intensity of such patience is best appreciated by those who all their lives have scamped and hurried and slighted and touched a thousand things without ever going to the bottom of a single one.

III
Nothing illustrates better the patience of Darwin, and of course also of hundreds of other scientists who are working as he worked in unknown laboratories all over the world, than the process of simple waiting so often necessary to obtain results. Nature demands time, often enormous time, and the brevity of human life and the evanescence of human opportunity mean nothing to her. The careful working out of scientific investigation requires the study of successive generations, sometimes of many, the sowing of the seed and the gathering of the blossom, the close observation of the individual from conception to death, which can be carried on only through long periods of time. The observer must keep a dozen lines of study in his mind, must maintain them side by side, and must[Pg 30] be always ready to turn from one to the other, as some new development arises that demands his attention. It was in this phase of long, renewed, continued, enduring watchfulness that Darwin was preëminent. As well appears in his son’s record: ‘I think it was all due to the vitality and persistence of his mind—a quality I have heard him speak of as if he felt that he was strongly gifted in that respect. Not that he used any such phrases as these about himself, but he would say that he had the power of keeping a subject or question more or less before him for a great many years.’[43] Very little examination of Darwin’s books is required to show how amply and constantly this power was exercised.

And to give such patience and taste for continuity their full effect there is needed almost a passion for system, for orderly arrangement, and the habit of putting not only things but thoughts in their proper places, so that they can be called upon at the right moment in the right way. Darwin himself describes his elaborate method of indexing the books that he read and the notes that he made, so that whenever he wished to deal with any special subject, he could turn at once to material bearing upon it: ‘Before beginning on any subject[Pg 31] I look to all the short indexes and make a general and classified index, and by taking the one or more proper portfolios I have all the information collected during my life ready for use.’[44]

Such systematic habits of working both demand and imply an orderly and economical use of time. Owing to his limitations of health, Darwin’s working time was extremely limited, but he made the most of it. Every usable hour was allotted, and the utmost profit and result were extracted from it. No doubt such sense of pressure is in itself not very beneficial to health, but it means an immense amount of work accomplished. The time was employed thriftily as well as intelligently: ‘He saved a great deal of time through not having to do things twice.’[45] And everywhere there is the feeling of the value of minutes which is indicated in Dante’s saying,

Chè’l perder tempo, a chi più sa, più spiace.[46]
Or as Darwin himself expresses it: ‘A man who dares to waste one hour of time has not discovered the value of life.’[47]

Still another element of observation richly illustrated in Darwin, and closely connected with the patience and the continuity, is the element of comparison. Observation by itself, the mere accumulation[Pg 32] of curious detail, does not get us very far. Observations must be bound together, one with another, they must be connected and related, intertwined into results and conclusions, often remote and far-reaching, or they do not begin to attain all their possible significance. In Darwin’s own phrase: ‘As you say, there is an extraordinary pleasure in pure observation; not but what I suspect the pleasure in this case is rather derived from comparisons forming in one’s mind from allied structures.’[48] This more elaborate process of comparison, however, leads us at once to the methods of deliberate experiment for a special purpose, and will therefore be more fully and naturally considered in the next chapter.

As to the more practical side of observation, one is largely impressed with all the difficulties and drawbacks of it, when pursued on any considerable scale, and certainly Darwin’s life affords abundant illustration of these, some peculiar to himself and some of a more general nature which beset most naturalists more or less.

There are the difficulties that always attend extensive field and outdoor work. In a voyage such as that of the Beagle, in a small sailing ship a hundred years ago, there were the elements of actual danger.[Pg 33] Darwin was the last person to enlarge upon his courage in meeting these or in disregarding them. Of his childhood he says: ‘I remember how very much I was afraid of meeting the dogs in Barker Street, and how at school I could not get up my courage to fight: I was very timid by nature.’[49] But repeated experiences during the voyage of the Beagle make it evident that the timidity was overcome by a calm and intelligent comprehension of conditions and necessities. Perhaps the most interesting illustration is Darwin’s attitude toward an earthquake in South America: ‘I have had ill luck, however, in only one little earthquake having happened. I was lying in bed when there was a party at dinner in the house; on a sudden I heard such a hubbub in the dining-room; without a word being spoken, it was devil take the hindmost and who should get out first; at the same moment I felt my bed slightly vibrate in a lateral direction. The party were old stagers, and heard the noise which always precedes a shock; and no old stager looks at an earthquake with philosophical eyes.’[50]

Worse perhaps than the specific, exceptional dangers were the constant annoyances and discomforts. Food was often insufficient, ill-prepared, and indigestible. Cold was wearing and heat was[Pg 34] wearing. There was exposure to all sorts of weather, there was the torment of insects, there was endless, inescapable fatigue, which could not be remedied or avoided, but just had to be borne and forgotten in the excitement of great or even little objects to be attained. Glimpses here and there, never unduly emphasized, show what these trials were and how they were met: ‘The road, from some recent rain, was full of little puddles of clear water, yet not a drop was drinkable. I had scarcely been twenty hours without water, and only part of the time under a hot sun, yet the thirst rendered me very weak. How people survive two or three days under such circumstances, I cannot imagine.’[51] To put up with discomforts during a camping trip of a few weeks or months is one thing. To endure them constantly for five years implies a very pretty enthusiasm for the cause of science.

Besides these external drawbacks to observation, there are others more subjective and personal. A minor aspect of these has interested me, because it shows such a delightful mixture of human feeling and scientific curiosity. As we shall have occasion to amplify later, Darwin was remarkable for tenderness, for sympathy, for affectionate and kindly interest, not only in humanity generally and in[Pg 35] animals, but especially in those directly connected with him. Yet his investigations of expression led him, forced him, to a calm and cold-blooded analysis of situations and emotions which at the same time made the strongest appeal to his sympathies. All through his children’s infancy he pursued the practice of making notes on them, yet it is most curious to trace the play of personal emotion in combination with the abstract research, and the working of this well appears in his son’s remark: ‘It was characteristic of him that (as I have heard him tell), although he was so anxious to observe the expression of a crying child, his sympathy with the grief spoiled his observation.’[52] A more impersonal example is his careful record as to a woman whom he studied in a railway carriage, watching with minute attention the movement of her depressores anguli oris, which appeared to indicate extreme distress: ‘As her countenance remained as placid as ever, I reflected how meaningless was this contraction, and how easily one might be deceived. The thought had hardly occurred to me when I saw that her eyes suddenly became suffused with tears almost to overflowing and her whole countenance fell. There could now be no doubt that some painful recollection, perhaps that of a long-lost child, was passing[Pg 36] through her mind.’[53] And so instances of intense individual suffering became generalized into typical cases of scientific record.

Far more important, however, in Darwin’s career, as a drawback to scientific observation, than any intrusions of subjective sympathy, were the bitter, persistent limitations of physical illness and weakness. During a very large part of his life he was tormented by nervous indigestion, manifesting itself, under any strain, in persistent nausea. This first appeared in the ever-returning and unconquerable sea-sickness which made all his southern voyages a misery. When the ocean was at all boisterous the malady prostrated him, and those who know how absolutely prostrating sea-sickness is will appreciate the positive heroism which enabled him to prosecute his journey and his researches with such a handicap.

After his return to England the trouble continued to hound and haunt him through all his later years. He never could work for more than a small portion of the day. The excitement of visitors always upset him. There were long periods when any work was impossible and often an absorbing investigation had to be laid aside altogether just at the most critical point, laid aside so[Pg 37] completely that not only actual labor but even thought was prohibited. The idleness which he detested was forced upon him for a very large part of his days and hours and the spirit framed for such constant and intense activity was obliged to discipline itself to the most irksome and profitless repose.

It made no difference in the intensity or the persistence of his scientific preoccupations. Perhaps if he had abandoned his pursuits altogether and had contented himself with an indolent and externally diversified existence, he might have enjoyed reasonable health. But he would not yield for a moment. His whole soul was in the studies, the pursuits, the investigations that enthralled and inspired him, and life without them would have been inconceivable. ‘We have come here for rest for me, which I have much needed; and shall remain here for about ten days more, and then home to work, which is my sole pleasure in life.’[54] That is the constant note. In the midst of his travels he wrote home: ‘My mind has been since leaving England, in a perfect hurricane of delight and astonishment, and to this hour scarcely a minute has passed in idleness.’[55] The body might lag and drag and harass and torment, but the spirit lived in just such a hurricane of excitement and enthusiasm always.

[Pg 38]

IV
It must be recognized that even in the pure habit of observation for itself, whether in the natural world or otherwise, there is a charm for those who are born for it. Curiosity is a natural instinct with most of us, and there is inexhaustible entertainment in letting the spirit lie fallow within, while the external world plays upon it with an endless succession of picturesque incidents and highly colored circumstance. At the same time, and especially in the realm of nature, it is astonishing what a difference even a little knowledge makes. Most of us walk through the fields and woods like blind men, utterly oblivious of all the fascinating secrets which await our eyes and ears if we were only alive to them. As one who has always delighted in solitary wood walks merely for their associative beauty, I at least can bewail the deplorable ignorance as to plants and birds and insects which makes it impossible for me even to interrogate them intelligently. Lack of time or natural indolence have prevented my accumulating the knowledge which would put all these things in their proper relations and make them tell a story which the trained and expert observer instantly and instinctively reads in them. It is comforting to find even Darwin complaining[Pg 39] of the same ignorance and the same blindness, when he gets into surroundings that are strange to him. Thus in his earlier voyaging, he notes: ‘One great source of perplexity to me is an utter ignorance whether I note the right facts, and whether they are of sufficient importance to interest others.’[56] And again even more vividly: ‘It is positively distressing to walk in the glorious forest amidst such treasures and feel they are all thrown away upon one.’[57]

Then with the coming of a little knowledge the observation is enriched, transfigured, glorified. Hear what Thoreau says of even the apparently dry and profitless acquisition of nomenclature: ‘With the knowledge of the name comes a distincter recognition and knowledge of the thing. That shore is now more describable and poetic even. My knowledge was cramped and confined before, and grew rusty because not used—for it could not be used. My knowledge now becomes communicable and grows by communication.’[58] Knowledge in one branch amplifies and steadies observation in that branch. Knowledge of many branches connects them and makes each one throw light on all the others. Record of others’ observations or of your own through several years give each new year[Pg 40] double significance and fruitfulness. As Thoreau again puts it: ‘I soon found myself observing when plants first blossomed and leafed, and I followed it up early and late, far and near, several years in succession, running to different sides of the town and into the neighboring towns, often between twenty and thirty miles in a day.’[59] If your attention gets fixed upon some special point to be elucidated, every walk you take, and almost every step brings out some development which you did not consider or imagine before. In short the enrichment of knowledge doubles, triples, quintuples your vision, since it teaches you what to look for, and even while it sometimes betrays, teaches you what to see.

But if mere general scientific knowledge is so stimulating and so enlarging in the realm of observation, how infinitely more fruitful is the Darwinian view of the interrelated development of all life including that of man. Whatever may be said, whatever we may have to say later, of the injurious action of this view upon the status of man himself, there can be no question as to the transforming, magical effect of it upon the study of the natural world. Before the evolutionary attitude, the observation of plants and animals was at best a mere[Pg 41] gratification of curiosity. The proper study of mankind was man, and the investigation of birds and insects was only distraction and diversion. But the instant it appeared that all the threads of life were intertwined and that in disentangling even the slightest of them you might be getting the clue to the riddle of the whole, all was changed. When it comes to be felt that the history of man, of his instincts, of his passions, of his powers, of his future, of his fate, is written in his past, and that past is to be studied, if at all, in the history of the humblest creatures who are animated by the same mysterious impulse of life that moulds and governs him, the interest of natural observation is increased a thousandfold. It is not exaggerating to say that the study of natural history is an entirely different pursuit since Darwin from what it was before.

It is evident that Darwin himself was constantly and immensely impressed by the profound significance thus added to scientific research. A passage in his earlier note-books shows how the idea was beginning to take hold of him: ‘If we choose to let conjecture run wild, then animals, our fellow brethren in pain, disease, death, suffering and famine—our slaves in the most laborious works, our companions in our amusements—they may partake[Pg 42] of our origin in one common ancestor—we may be all melted together.’[60]

A striking concrete illustration of the community of life, even in the humblest forms, appears in the book on earthworms and suggests Emerson’s poetical version of the same idea,

‘And striving to be man the worm
Mounts through all the spires of form:’
‘It may be well to remember how perfect the sense of touch becomes in a man when born blind and deaf, as are worms. If worms have the power of acquiring some notion, however rude, of the shape of an object and of their burrows, as seems to be the case, they deserve to be called intelligent; for they then act in nearly the same manner as would a man under similar circumstances.’[61] While a celebrated passage in ‘The Origin of Species’ develops the idea abstractly, by implication at least placing man at the apex of the whole: ‘As buds give rise by growth to fresh buds, and these, if vigorous, branch out and overtop on all sides many a feebler branch, so by generation I believe it has been with the great Tree of Life, which fills with its dead and broken branches the crust of the earth, and covers the surface with its ever-branching and beautiful ramifications.’[62]

[Pg 43]

Wallace said of his great friend and competitor, ‘Again, both Darwin and myself had what he terms “the mere passion of collecting”.... I should describe it rather as an intense interest in the mere variety of living things.’[63] The simple observer is carried away, absorbed, ravished by the delight and the fascinating play of this variety of living things, but how far more absorbing and inexhaustible does the delight become when we feel that in studying this universal play of life we are every moment probing the depths of our own souls.

[Pg 44]

CHAPTER II
DARWIN: THE THINKER
I
Mere observation of the natural world, varied, fascinating, inexhaustible as it is, affords only the material for science. Observed facts must be built up, woven together, ordered, arranged, systematized into conclusions and theories by reflection and reason, if they are to have full bearing on life and the universe. Knowledge is the accumulation of facts. Wisdom is the establishment of relations. And just because the latter process is delicate and perilous, it is all the more delightful. The lofty scorn of the true philosopher for mere perception is well shown in Royer Collard’s remark: ‘There is nothing so despicable as a fact.’ Which does not prevent philosophers or any one else from making facts the essential basis of all discussion of relations. Darwin’s own comments on the general connection between the two are always interesting: ‘I have an old belief that a good observer really means a good theorist,’[432] and again: ‘About thirty years ago there was much talk that geologists ought only to observe [Pg 45]and not theorize; and I well remember some one saying that at this rate a man might as well go into a gravel-pit and count the pebbles and describe the colors. How odd it is that any one should not see that all observation must be for or against some view if it is to be of any service.’[433]

It is supposed to be one of the chief functions of education to develop this faculty of relating facts to each other and to train and strengthen the reasoning powers. Darwin did not feel that education did much for him in this line, at any rate in the scientific directions which were of especial interest to him. He believed that his academic discipline was largely wasted. Making Latin verses did not appeal. More general lines of current information attracted him very little, and he seemed at times oddly ignorant of what the ordinary educated man is expected to know. Thus his son records that he once asked Hooker where ‘this place Wien is where they publish so many books.’[434] He read vastly in all that concerned his own work, but that very fact prevented his keeping up with daily interests that were remote from it. His own comment on his university experience is bitter: ‘During the three years which I spent at Cambridge my time was wasted, as far as the academical studies were[Pg 46] concerned, as completely as at Edinburgh and at school.’[435] And he believed that he had learned everything that to him was worth learning pretty much by his own efforts: ‘I consider that all I have learnt of any value has been self-taught.’[436]


DOWN HOUSE FROM THE GARDEN

With this sort of discipline behind him, it is of great interest to examine his general attitude toward the connection of reasoning and fact. To some of us the controversy between induction and deduction has always seemed rather profitless. The Baconian insistence upon the absolute necessity of fact as the basis of all solid theory is of course indisputably just. But to talk of proceeding from abstract theory to the investigation of fact seems as barren as to wander aimlessly in unassorted realms of fact without the assistance of theory. It is comforting, therefore, to find so clear and systematic a thinker as Huxley unwilling to identify his processes with either complete induction or deduction: ‘Those who refuse to go beyond fact rarely get as far as fact; and any one who has studied the history of science knows that almost every great step therein has been made by the “anticipation of nature,” that is, by the invention of hypotheses which, though verifiable, often had very little foundation to start with; and not unfrequently, in spite of a[Pg 47] long career of usefulness, turned out to be wholly erroneous in the long run.’[437]

Now Darwin obviously finds himself in precisely the uncertainty between inductive and deductive methods that Huxley here indicates. His instincts were naturally hostile to abstract theory, which used facts as playthings to substantiate soaring conjecture. He says in regard to one scientific author: ‘I am not convinced, partly I think owing to the deductive cast of much of his reasoning; and I know not why, but I never feel convinced by deduction, even in the case of H. Spencer’s writings.’[438] And he speaks even more specifically concerning Spencer himself: ‘I always feel a malicious pleasure when a priori conclusions are knocked on the head; and therefore I felt somewhat like a devil when I read your remarks on Herbert Spencer.’[439] Early and late he emphasized that ‘no one has a right to speculate without distinct facts.’[440] Yet at the same time he urges and reiterates that the mere collection of facts, without some basis of theory for guidance and elucidation, is foolish and profitless: ‘I am a firm believer that without speculation there is no good and original observation.’[441]

The truth is, the importance of imaginative power in the equipment of a great scientist is[Pg 48] often underestimated. Exact and watchful vision is the first necessity; but it does not go far, or not farthest, except as it has behind it the thoughts that wander through eternity, the vast and questing genius that is perpetually on the lookout for causes and explanations and is eager to evolve theory from the sure and substantial but inanimate basis of fact. Even Thoreau almost deplores his intense preoccupation with the fascinating business of observing: ‘Man cannot afford to be a naturalist, to look at Nature directly, but only with the side of his eye. He must look through and beyond her. To look at her is fatal as to look at the head of Medusa. It turns the man of science to stone. I feel that I am dissipated by so many observations.... I have almost a slight, dry headache as the result of all this observing.’[442] Theory, speculation, must be perpetually checked and restrained by the precision of systematic logic, but the accurate eye and the careful finger need to be supplemented by the eternally active mind.

As to the activity of Darwin’s mind there can be no question whatever. He not only saw, but he thought incessantly. If you compare the Beagle Journal with the Journal of Thoreau, you see at once how much more quick and ready the English[Pg 49] naturalist is with speculation and conjecture. The smallest fact is apt to set him off on a train of theory, where Thoreau simply records, or possibly compares, and passes on. How significant is the brief comment of Asa Gray, in regard to some botanical point which as a specialist in that line he should have been the first to develop: ‘That is real Darwin. I just wonder you and I never thought of it. But he did.’[443] And he not only thought himself, he had the rarer and more valuable faculty of making others think. His mind was so intense and so magnetic in its constant activity that all those who came into contact with it were impelled and fired to work double on speculation of their own. ‘You stimulate my mind,’ says Gray again, ‘far more than any one else, except, perhaps Hooker.’[444]

On this point of intellectual fertility, as on his other scientific qualifications, it is most interesting to hear Darwin himself. The mental activity was present early and late, and it does not appear that the exuberance of youth especially emphasized it or that it tended to increase with the later desire to develop and elaborate his special theories. He himself says in the Autobiographical sketch: ‘I am not conscious of any change in my mind during the last thirty years, excepting in one point: ...[Pg 50] I think that I have become a little more skillful in guessing right explanations and in devising experimental tests; but this may probably be the result of mere practice, and of a larger store of knowledge.’[445]

The quick intelligence was always working, sometimes wearily, sometimes eagerly, but working, unless absolute physical prostration forbade. When he is too exhausted, he complains: ‘Facts compel me to conclude that my brain was never formed for much thinking.’[446] But if so, he certainly lived contrary to his nature. He tells us that he cannot resist forming hypotheses on every subject.[447] Sometimes he bewails the tendency, realizing its drawbacks and dangers. Sometimes he gives way to it, recognizing its charm: ‘It is delightful to have many points fermenting in one’s brain.’[448] Speculation is fascinating. Theory gives form and texture to the fleeting drift and confusion of fact. Yet even when one indulges with most enthusiasm, a touch of humor shows that the satisfaction must be tempered with a certain lack of entire confidence: ‘That is a splendid fact about the white moths; it warms one’s very blood to see a theory thus almost proved to be true.’[449]

For the wonder and the interest of Darwin is, that, with such an eager and perpetual bent toward[Pg 51] theorizing, he could keep the bent so fully under control. As Karl Pearson puts it, generally: ‘Hundreds of men have allowed their imagination to solve the universe, but the men who have contributed to our real understanding of natural phenomena have been those who were unstinted in their application of criticism to the product of their imaginations.’[450] Surely no man applied such criticism more carefully, more conscientiously, more constantly than Darwin. He analyzes his own position and sees the dangers of it: ‘Living so solitary as I do, one gets to think in a silly manner of one’s own work.’[451] He sees constantly how theory interferes and warps the judgment: ‘I have not a doubt that before many months are over I shall be longing for the most dishonest species as being more honest than the honestest theories.’[452] The possibility of error haunts him, torments him, and he knows well how apt his own speculative disposition is to mislead: ‘What you hint at generally is very, very true: that my work will be grievously hypothetical, and large parts by no means worthy of being called induction, my commonest error being probably induction from too few facts.’[453] As a consequence he was ever on his guard against being led astray. The tempting little demon of hypothesis might be[Pg 52] luring round the corner: ‘It is as difficult not to form some opinion as it is to form a correct judgment.’[454] But whatever opinion was formed must be corrected, must be adjusted, must be tested, by the cold and rigid measure of fact. As he says himself, ‘I have steadily endeavored to keep my mind free so as to give up any hypothesis, however much beloved (and I cannot resist forming one on every subject), as soon as the facts are shown to be opposed to it.’[455] And one who knew him well and had studied him carefully says the same thing with equal emphasis: ‘His long experience had given him a kind of instinctive insight into the method of attack of any biological problem, however unfamiliar to him, while he rigidly controlled the fertility of his mind in hypothetical explanations by the no less fertility of ingeniously devised experiment.’[456]

In regard to this matter of speculative freedom and the tendency to let imagination run wild, it is interesting to watch Darwin’s comments on the general methods of others. The excess of abstinence he indeed deplores, recognizing that a man’s extreme caution may prevent him from theorizing enough: ‘How many astronomers have labored their whole lives on observations, and have[Pg 53] not drawn a single conclusion.’[457] But the danger on the other side is so great and so ruinous that it cannot be enough insisted on, and indeed at times it makes all generalization suspicious and almost a thing to be eschewed: ‘I look at a strong tendency to generalize as an entire evil.’[458] At any rate, the theorist must never forget the subjective element, that his preconceptions and prejudices are apt to warp his judgment and distort his vision, till the keenest of observers and the sanest of thinkers may go astray: ‘the firmest conviction of the truth of a doctrine by its author seems, alas, not to be the slightest guarantee of truth.’[459]

The profit and the lesson of all which must be constantly borne home to oneself: ‘When I think of the many cases of men who have studied one subject for years, and have persuaded themselves of the truth of the foolishest doctrines, I feel sometimes a little frightened, whether I may not be one of these monomaniacs.’[460]

To appreciate fully Darwin’s combination of mental activity and fertility with moderation and restraint, it is well to place him between two extreme types of thinkers. On the one hand, there is the born essential reasoner, and logician, Spinoza, for instance, or Hegel, or Darwin’s own contemporary,[Pg 54] Spencer, the man who to a greater or less extent takes fact for his foundation, but who by nature and temperament delights to weave an elaborate web of logical theory, rigid and perfect in its appearance of systematic deduction, but too apt in the end to treat facts with indifference if not disrespect. I like especially in this regard to compare Darwin with Lucretius. The De Rerum Natura is one of the most striking, enthralling examples of what I should call passionate thinking. Theoretical problems take hold of Lucretius like the ecstasies of love. He tears and wrenches at the roots of thought, determined to make them yield to the delving vigor of his eager search. Now Darwin has a broad and constant curiosity, his interest may well be called enthusiasm, and he himself uses the term passion for it: ‘Hence it has come to be a passion with me to try to connect all such facts by some sort of hypothesis.’[461] Yet in no phase of his nature should I be inclined ever to employ the general word, ‘passion,’ and it seems to me that every page of Lucretius is stamped with a devouring ardor different from anything Darwin knew.

On the other hand, over against these furious reasoners, I should set Darwin’s close contemporary, Sainte-Beuve, who, as I said in the previous[Pg 55] chapter was, in some aspects, as admirable a representative of the scientific spirit as Darwin himself. The endless curiosity, the unlimited observation of fact, as embodied in the human subject, have never been more richly exemplified than in the great French critic. But Sainte-Beuve was no reasoner in the larger sense. He did not even avoid reasoning from mistrust: he had no taste for it, and when he dealt with it, it was always charily and with extreme reserve. He delighted to study and portray individuals and to allow those individuals, as it were, to classify themselves and so to point the way to general results.

Between these two extremes Darwin stands, as one who used reasoning to the fullest extent for the interpretation of fact, yet at the same time always stuck closely and rigidly to the fact itself, and would not allow it to be for an instant distorted by the reasoning process.

II
The supreme means for keeping theory on a basis of fact is of course unfailing, persistent, ever-varied experiment. In the preceding chapter we have seen observation lead naturally to experiment; but experiment is observation guided, directed, and[Pg 56] illuminated by theory. And assuredly no scientist ever had the love and the habit of experiment more firmly fixed than Darwin. The explanation of phenomena was all very well in its place, essential, absorbing, but he would have agreed absolutely with Aristotle as to the proper ordering of the process: ‘After this we shall pass on to the discussion of causes. For to do this when the investigation of the details is complete, is the proper and natural method, and that whereby the subject and the premises of our argument will afterwards be rendered plain.’[462] The fascination of experiment in itself was endless and almost sufficing: ‘The love of experiment was very strong in him,’ says his son, ‘and I can remember the way he would say, “I shan’t be easy till I have tried it,” as if an outside force were driving him.’[463] There was a sense of adventure about it, of discovery, and he loved to try things that seemed almost fantastic and absurd: ‘If you knew some of the experiments (if they may be so-called) which I am trying, you would have a good right to sneer, for they are so absurd even in my opinion that I dare not tell you.’[464] And more concisely and vividly: ‘I am like a gambler and love a wild experiment.’[465] The best comment on which is the excellent remark of Professor[Pg 57] Castle: ‘Most advances in practical affairs are made by those who have the courage to attempt what others with good reason think unattainable. When such attempts have succeeded, the world simply revises its classification of things attainable and unattainable, and makes a fresh start.’[466]

The first thing in regard to experiment is conditions. There are of course rough and elementary experiments, involving only simple principles, which do not require minute care in detail. But in many cases the nicest and most delicate preparation and adjustment are indispensable to ensure reliable results. The extensive equipment of modern laboratories was not at Darwin’s command, and though he had considerable financial resources, he could not afford the unlimited outlay of commercial research. Thus, we read of one of Mr. Burbank’s trials: ‘Forty thousand blackberry and raspberry hybrids were produced and grown until the fruit matured. Then from the whole lot a single variety was chosen as the best.... All others were uprooted with their crop of ripening berries, heaped up into a pile twelve feet wide, fourteen feet high, and twenty-two feet long, and burned. Nothing remained of this expensive and lengthy experiment, except the one parent plant of the new variety.’[Pg 58][467] Darwin could hardly work on any such elaborate scale as this. Yet, as one turns over his vast record of experiment, one is astonished to see how thorough and painstaking was his effort to avoid accidents and to provide for disturbing contingencies. Take, for instance, as a minor but significant illustration, his account of the difficulty in carrying out the specific fertilization of certain plants: ‘In making eighteen different unions, sometimes on windy days, and pestered by bees and flies buzzing about, some few errors could hardly be avoided. One day I had to keep a third man by me all the time to prevent the bees visiting the uncovered plants, for in a few seconds’ time they might have done irreparable mischief. It was also extremely difficult to exclude minute Diptera from the net.’[468]

Another vital consideration as to experiment, is that it should be kept impersonal. In most cases, if one is to experiment fruitfully and satisfactorily, there should be some special object in view, some particular point to be rejected or confirmed. Unless you know just what you are looking for, you are apt not to see. Again and again in Darwin’s book on Orchids, as in many of the others, we read that he made investigations and got no results, simply because he did not have in mind theoretical possibilities.[Pg 59] When he had reasoned out what ought to happen or might happen, he often found that it did. The danger of this method is obvious. When the experimenter is so desperately anxious to see something, unless he is most carefully trained and disciplined, he will see it. It is not to be supposed that Darwin always escaped this danger, but few men have been more prepared for it or more ready to allow for it than he. His confession of prejudice, his recognition of the importance of certain points in his general theory and of his unwillingness to have anything interfere with them are among his greatest charms: ‘I remember well the time when the thought of the eye made me cold all over.... The sight of a feather in a peacock’s tail, whenever I gaze at it, makes me sick.’[469]

We have already enlarged under observation on the essential quality of accuracy, and it may simply be added that accuracy is doubly important in all experiments for a theoretical purpose. Accuracy, complete, detailed, mathematical exactitude, was Darwin’s hobby, and the minuteness of his record constantly exemplifies it.

Also, to confirm their accuracy experiments have to be repeated. Goethe remarks with justice that[Pg 60] it is not necessary to travel all over the world to make sure that the sky is everywhere blue,[470] and no doubt there are repetitions that are vain and superfluous. But many difficult and delicate researches have to be gone over again and again that the minutest detail may be complete; and the process may involve months of tedious delay. Darwin’s unfailing care, both to repeat and to avoid repetition, is well indicated in his son’s comment: ‘Although he would patiently go on repeating experiments where there was any good to be gained, he could not endure having to repeat an experiment which ought, if complete care had been taken, to have succeeded the first time.’[471] Here too, one cannot appreciate how immense and thorough his experimentation was without looking through such books as the ‘Animals and Plants under Domestication’ or ‘The Power of Movement in Plants.’ The endless repetition of slightly varied combinations to test a difficult or remote conclusion makes one feel how persistent and inexhaustible the patience was. And after all the years of repeated and varied research and investigation he writes the almost pathetic epilogue six months before his death: ‘I wish that I had enough strength and spirit to commence a fresh set of experiments, and[Pg 61] publish the results, with a full recantation of my errors when convinced of them.’[429]

Finally, experiments have to be not only made, but recorded, and the accuracy, so essential with all scientific observation, is above all essential here, since the omission of a link in the record may be ruinous to the continuity of the logical chain. It is peculiarly characteristic of Darwin that he wanted the record of error and mistake as well as of success. ‘I remember,’ says his son, ‘how strongly he urged the necessity of keeping the notes of experiments which failed, and to this rule he always adhered.’[430] The value of preserving and comparing apparently insignificant and meaningless notes is sometimes brought out, as in a special case of orchids: ‘I had given up the case as hopeless, until summing up my observations, the explanation presently to be given, and subsequently proved by repeated experiments to be correct, suddenly occurred to me.’[431] Long experience of his own mistakes and failures induces extreme scepticism as to the results of others: ‘The difficulty is to know what to trust.’[352] Even when he has taken the greatest pains, the scepticism often lingers and forces him to repeat although with an identical result: ‘Notwithstanding the care taken and the number of[Pg 62] trials made, when in the following year I looked merely at the results, without reading over my observations, I again thought that there must have been some error, and thirty-five fresh trials were made with the weakest solution; but the results were as plainly marked as before.’[353] And thus the long series of packed, closely printed volumes forms an amazing record of a life of zealous, persistent, curious experimentation from beginning to end.

III
Now let us look a little more closely at the stuff and quality of Darwin’s logical processes, considered as such. He himself often complains of the slowness and difficulty of his thinking. It is hard for him to arrange his thoughts, he says, hard for him to get them into the lucid and effective order which carries conviction with it, almost enforces conviction by the power of its own movement. He says of one of his critics: ‘He admits to a certain extent Natural Selection, yet I am sure does not understand me. It is strange that very few do, and I am become quite convinced that I must be an extremely bad explainer.’[354]

It is worth while to note the comments of Huxley, as one of Darwin’s staunchest friends and supporters,[Pg 63] on his reasoning faculty and processes. When Romanes lauds Darwin’s colossal intellect, Huxley is inclined to protest: ‘Colossal does not seem to me to be the right epithet for Darwin’s intellect. He had a clear, rapid intelligence, a great memory, a vivid imagination, and what made his greatness was the strict subordination of all these to the love of truth.’[355] Elsewhere Huxley adds: ‘Exposition was not Darwin’s forte—and his English is sometimes wonderful. But there is a marvelous dumb sagacity about him and he gets to truth by ways as dark as those of the Heathen Chinee.’[356] Of ‘The Origin of Species’ Huxley writes: ‘It is one of the hardest books to understand thoroughly that I know of.’[357] And again, more amply: ‘Long occupation with the work has led the present writer to believe that “The Origin of Species” is one of the hardest of books to master, and he is justified in this conviction by observing that although the “Origin” has been close on thirty years before the world, the strangest misconceptions of the essential nature of the theory therein advocated are still put forth by serious writers.’[358] Critics less friendly to Darwin than Huxley have spoken still more strongly.

I feel that Huxley’s judgment is too severe. It[Pg 64] is true that Darwin had not the admirable gift of logical, lucid exposition which made Huxley himself one of the most luminous of scientific writers. But even when Darwin’s reasoning is most complex and difficult, there is a notable quality of sincerity and single-mindedness, which wins and retains your confidence. He seems somehow to have an exceptional power of taking you into his mental processes, and to make you think and see and feel as he does. If you feel that he may be wrong, it is because he feels that he may be wrong himself.

It is profitable to examine a little more in detail some illustrations of Darwin’s scientific theorizing. The great central doctrine of evolution, with its buttressing support of natural selection, will fill our next chapter, but there are several lesser developments of speculation which deserve notice. I need hardly say that we are not in any way discussing the validity of the theories in the abstract, but simply Darwin’s fashion of framing, holding, and sustaining them.

There is first the theory as to the formation of coral reefs. At an early period in his career Darwin conceived the idea that these reefs were produced by the subsidence of the ocean bed and the steady building up of the coral insects toward the surface.[Pg 65] He himself admits that this theory was the most deductive of all that he ever urged and the least founded in the beginning upon a wide and careful investigation of fact. Alexander Agassiz, who, after extensive research, was not disposed to accept it, wrote: ‘Darwin’s observations were all theoretical, based upon chartographic study in his house, a very poor way of doing, and that’s the way all his coral reef work has been done.’[359] And the theory has met with strenuous opposition from many quarters, though one critic says in regard to it: ‘Be it true or not, be it a competent explanation or not, no matter. In influence on geology it has been as far-reaching as the doctrine of natural selection has been on biology.’[360] But Darwin himself clung to it to the end, meeting objections with vast ingenuity and reiterating his positions with ampler and more penetrating arguments. Yet through all the persistence there is the readiness at any moment to see the other side. ‘I must still adhere to my opinion, that the atolls and barrier reefs in the middle of the Pacific and Indian Oceans indicate subsidence, but I fully agree with you that such cases as that of the Pellew Islands, if of at all frequent occurrence, would make my general conclusions of very little value. Future observers[Pg 66] must decide between us.’[361] And he writes frankly to Alexander Agassiz: ‘If I am wrong, the sooner I am knocked on the head and annihilated so much the better.’[362]

Another instance of Darwin’s zeal and ingenuity in reasoning is the theory of sexual selection, devised to meet some difficulties in his general argument. Many animals have certain so-called secondary sexual characteristics, that is, characteristics affecting one sex only yet not directly involved in the reproductive process. Darwin believed that these characteristics were largely developed through the working of natural selection upon the basis of the preference of one sex for individuals of the other for mating purposes. That is to say, the splendor of the male peacock’s tail made him more attractive to the female and therefore more successful with her. There were numerous and obvious difficulties in this view, as the assumption of a fine æsthetic sense in comparatively lowly organized creatures, and it was energetically disputed from the start. Wallace, Darwin’s ardent fellow-thinker and coadjutor, was anything but favorable to it. Yet Darwin’s faith was never really shaken. He persisted to the end, making new experiments and investigations, and meeting his adversaries’[Pg 67] contentions with vast and varied resource. In ‘The Descent of Man’ he wrote: ‘For my own part I conclude that of all the causes which have led to the differences in external appearance between the races of man, and to a certain extent between man and the lower animals, sexual selection has been the most efficient.’[363] Nevertheless, it is fascinating to see him reveal the doubt and the questioning that were inwrought with conviction in his mind. He writes to Wallace: ‘I grieve to differ from you, and it actually terrifies me and makes me constantly distrust myself.’[364] Again: ‘You will be pleased to hear that I am undergoing severe distress about protection and sexual selection; this morning I oscillated with joy towards you; this evening I have swung back to my [old] position, out of which I fear I shall never get.’[365] And he sums up the process with a general remark of the largest and most fruitful bearing: ‘I sometimes marvel how truth progresses, so difficult is it for one man to convince another, unless his mind is vacant. Nevertheless, I myself to a certain extent contradict my own remark, for I believe far more in the importance of protection than I did before reading your articles.’[366]

Still another example of theorizing is the doctrine[Pg 68] of pangenesis. Darwin’s general theory of evolution which dealt so much with heredity, was closely complicated with the difficulty of understanding how one minute reproductive cell could transmit by inheritance all the complicated variety of organs and functions in a highly developed plant or animal. To meet this difficulty he devised the explanation of pangenesis (he doubts about the name, because ‘my wife says it sounds wicked, like pantheism’),[367] that is, the idea that the primitive cell contains a great number of gemmules, each transmitting and originating some particular organ with its varied functions. Here again the theory, as Darwin conceived it, did not find general acceptance, though in some respects it surprisingly anticipates the results of the latest modern research. But the interesting thing is to see the ardor with which its inventor worked it out and the elaborate argument with which he carries it through the latter part of the great work on ‘Animals and Plants under Domestication.’ It is difficult, he admits. He does not blame any one for disputing it, or for rejecting it, or even for laughing at it. ‘The hypothesis of Pangenesis, as applied to the several great classes of facts just discussed, no doubt is extremely complex, but so are the facts.’[Pg 69][368] And then he lets his imagination range more widely than usual in contemplating possible deductions and consequences: ‘No other attempt, as far as I am aware, has been made, imperfect as this confessedly is, to connect under one point of view these several grand classes of facts. An organic being is a microcosm—a little universe, formed of a host of self-propagating organisms, inconceivably minute and numerous as the stars in heaven.’[369] Yet here again he introduces the inevitable reservation and in his Autobiographical Sketch he says: ‘Towards the end of the work I give my well-abused hypothesis of Pangenesis. An unverified hypothesis is of little or no value; but if any one should hereafter be led to make observations by which some such hypothesis could be established, I shall have done good service.’[370]

It seems sometimes surprising that, with this marked bent towards abstract speculation, which it was so difficult to control, Darwin should have been always so indifferent to philosophical thought on the ultimate questions of the universe. He admits that he knew little of metaphysics and cared little for them. But this again is instructive as to the peculiar balance of his temperament. He liked to speculate, but he would not speculate for a[Pg 70] moment without a firm foundation of fact. His feet must be based first on the solid tangible earth. Then if his head would not reach the clouds, he would keep out of them.

IV
It will be profitable to consider more in detail some specific elements of Darwin’s reasoning. In the first place, we have seen everywhere and in all connections that his propensity to eager theorizing was tempered with an unfailing sense of doubt and mistrust. He was indeed always disposed to act in the spirit of Weisman’s remark: ‘When we are confronted with facts which we see no possibility of understanding save on a single hypothesis, even though it be an undemonstratable one, we are naturally led to accept the hypothesis, at least until a better one can be found.’[371] And he recognized fully the force of the comment which Huxley makes on a phrase of Goethe, to the effect that doubt must not be blighting or destructive, but fruitful and stimulating: ‘Goethe has an excellent aphorism defining that state of mind which he calls “Thätige Skepsis”—active doubt. It is doubt which so loves truth that it neither dares rest in doubting nor extinguish itself by unjustified belief.’[64][Pg 71] At the same time, the doubt was there, was temperamental, and could not be altogether extinguished, even when the rush of the logical impetus was fullest. One beautiful expression of it among many is, ‘When you say you cannot master the train of thoughts, I know well enough that they are too doubtful and obscure to be mastered. I have often experienced what you call the humiliating feeling of getting more and more involved in doubt the more one thinks of the facts and reasoning on doubtful points.’[65] The truth is, that Darwin had in a high degree the quality, often so hampering to the man of practical action, but invaluable to the thinker, of getting outside of himself and his own point of view and criticizing it as if it were the standpoint of some one else. He himself indicates this forcibly in connection with returning to one’s ideas after an interval: ‘The delay in this case, as with all my other books, has been a great advantage to me; for a man after a long interval can criticize his own work, almost as well as if it were that of another person.’[66] Some men can.

Another characteristic of Darwin’s mental processes is his way of meeting difficulties. The born reasoner is apt to slur over obstacles and objections, to devote himself with endless ingenuity to[Pg 72] eliminating them rather than facing them squarely. Darwin was ingenious enough, but he did not dodge difficulties. Instead of doing so, his propensity was, if anything, to make them and seek them. It was said of Pasteur, so like Darwin in many points: ‘No adversary of M. Pasteur had formulated this argument; but M. Pasteur, who had within himself an ever-present adversary, always on the watch and determined to yield only to the force of accumulated evidence, himself raised the objection.’[67] So Darwin. As he himself records, and no thinker ever laid down a more significant principle or one more revealing for his own mental constitution: ‘I had, also, during many years followed a golden rule, namely, that whenever a published fact, a new observation or thought came across me, which was opposed to my general results, to make a memorandum of it without fail and at once; for I had found by experience that such facts and thoughts were far more apt to escape from the memory than favorable ones.’[68] And the intense consciousness of objections and difficulties appears even more vividly in the sentence: ‘I cannot too strongly express my conviction of the general truth of my doctrines, and God knows I have never shirked a difficulty.’[69]

[Pg 73]

The recognition of obstacles and complications constantly popping up from everywhere naturally necessitated endless revision and recasting. Here again, the habitual reasoner, having once set his mould is reluctant to alter it. Not so Darwin. There are indeed times when even he rebels and declares that it will be more fruitful to follow new paths than to be perpetually adjusting the old. But in general his readiness to alter and reconstruct is unlimited. He revises and works over his books. In doing so he showed his characteristic disposition to accept and defer to the judgment of others. How charming is his daughter’s account of this: ‘He was always so ready to be convinced that any suggested alteration was an improvement, and so full of gratitude for the trouble taken. I do not think that he ever used to forget to tell me what improvement he thought that I had made, and he used almost to excuse himself if he did not agree with any correction. I think I felt the singular modesty and graciousness of his nature through thus working for him in a way I never should otherwise have done.’[70] There is no better way to appreciate the extent and the persistence of Darwin’s revision than to make even a cursory comparison of the first and the last editions of the ‘Origin.’[Pg 74] Almost every page shows minor or considerable changes, and while some are no doubt mere matters of language, many have a bearing, however slight, on the trend of the reasoning, deepening, or strengthening, or clarifying it.

It is profitable also to watch Darwin’s attitude towards argument, the direct interchange of view by those who take different sides of a case and are at once eager to advance their own and to detect the flaws in their opponent’s. It is very evident that he was not a quick and natural arguer, as was Huxley, for instance. His son says: ‘He used to say of himself that he was not quick enough to hold an argument with any one, and I think this was true. Unless it was a subject on which he was just then at work, he could not get the train of argument into working order quickly enough.’[71] And Darwin confesses the same thing with his unfailing, charming naïveté, in a letter to Hooker: ‘I am astonished at your success and audacity. It is something unintelligible to me how any one can argue in public like orators do. I had no idea you had this power.’[72]

Arguments haunted him, agitated him, disturbed him. Active discussion was apt to be followed by a broken night, filled with the things that might and should have been said and were not. Even of a[Pg 75] conversation quite remote from his scientific interest he says: ‘Your slave discussion disturbed me much; but as you would care no more for my opinion on this head than for the ashes of this letter, I will say nothing except that it gave me some sleepless, most uncomfortable hours.’[73]

The gift I have before suggested, of getting outside of your own position and judging it as another would, while it benefits the results of argument, is most hampering in the process, since one finds oneself stating one’s adversary’s case sometimes more forcibly than he does himself. Darwin often repeats the principle I have quoted earlier, of recognizing and recording objections, and he sums up his method in regard to his main theory: ‘I have for some time determined to give the arguments on both sides (as far as I could) instead of arguing on the mutability side alone.’[74]

Yet in spite of all the strain and effort of argument, he liked it and believed in it. In the concluding chapter of the ‘Origin’ he says: ‘This whole volume is one long argument.’[75] It certainly is. Elsewhere he says of a personal conversation: ‘I was particularly glad of our discussion after dinner; fighting a battle with you always clears my mind wonderfully.’[76] To get the mind clear, to illuminate[Pg 76] and elucidate the complicated tangles of thought and theory, that was always the object, and if verbal battles helped it on, they were welcome.

But if he liked sincere, earnest argument, he detested controversy, the bitter war of excited personal feelings bent rather on achieving an individual triumph than on proving an abstract theory. He condemned and deplored the injury to science inevitably wrought by such disputes and had nothing but disgust for the manifestations of temper that were bound to accompany them: ‘I went the other evening to the Zoölogical Society, where the speakers were snarling at each other in a manner anything but like that of gentlemen.’[77]

When his own views were involved in bitterness, as, alas, they too often were, he expressed the keenest regret: ‘I often think that my friends ... have good cause to hate me, for having stirred up so much mud, and led them into so much odious trouble. If I had been a friend of myself, I should have hated me.’[78] He early made up his mind to keep out of quarrels if possible, and he congratulated himself on the whole on his success: ‘I rejoice that I have avoided controversies, and this I owe to Lyell, who many years ago, in reference to my geological works, strongly advised me never to[Pg 77] get entangled in a controversy, as it rarely did any good and caused a miserable loss of time and temper.’[79]

Thus, whenever it was possible, he shunned dispute, and if, by any chance, haste and eagerness involved him in a mistaken cause, he bitterly regretted his blunder and was ready to acknowledge it with the utmost frankness. One of the most striking cases of this is that of the parallel roads of Glen Roy, as to which Darwin had developed a geological theory which he asserted with a good deal of conviction. A careful consideration of his opponent’s arguments, obliged him to recognize that he was completely in the wrong, and he gave up, though with a pang: ‘I am very poorly to-day, and very stupid, and hate everybody and everything. One lives only to make blunders.’[80] His acknowledgment of his error was ample and complete.

It was his natural frankness in admitting his mistakes and endeavoring to rectify them which made Darwin so attractive and engaging. Goethe complains of the disposition of many people to reiterate a misstatement because they have once made it.[81] Such reiteration did not appeal to Darwin in the least. Sometimes he was irritated and[Pg 78] annoyed by the attitude of his adversaries, and he expressed the annoyance with the same outspokenness that he gave to other things; but there was never any attempt to conceal his blunders or to maintain his own positions simply because they were his.

Indeed, in this regard, as in all others, what distinguished him was a singular and charming candor. It is this which makes his letters so attractive and so revealing. They are not great literary letters. They are always written in haphazard fashion and with the utmost casual directness. But few correspondences of literary men or of any others reveal the man with such clear and winning amplitude. He opens his heart and leads you right into it without the least pretence of self-revelation, but simply as if he were thinking aloud to you, as he is. Take, for instance, among a bewildering mass of illustrations, his confession of the sense of inferiority in regard to Spencer: ‘I feel rather mean when I read him: I could bear, rather enjoy feeling that he was twice as ingenious and clever as myself, but when I feel that he is about a dozen times my superior, even in the master art of wriggling, I feel aggrieved.’[82] Or this other acknowledgment to Hooker: ‘How candidly and meekly you took[Pg 79] my Jeremiad on your severity to second-class men. After I had sent it off, an ugly little voice asked me, once or twice, how much of my noble defence of the poor in spirit and in fact, was owing to your having not seldom smashed favorite notions of my own. I silenced the ugly little voice with contempt, but it would whisper again and again.’[83] The sense, the atmosphere, of a pervading candor, was what Huxley expressed so excellently when he spoke of Darwin’s having ‘a certain intense and almost passionate honesty by which all his thoughts and actions were irradiated, as by a central fire. It was this greatest and rarest of endowments which kept his vivid imagination and great speculative powers within due bounds ... which made him accept criticisms and suggestions from anybody and everybody, not only without impatience, but with expressions of gratitude sometimes almost comically in excess of their value.’[84]

For the honesty and the candor not only led him to admit his own mistakes, but made him singularly ready to recognize the merits of others, and to tolerate not only their views but even their dogmatic assertion of them. He made mistakes all the time, and yet he knew that he was sincere and lofty in purpose. Why should not others be the same?[Pg 80] Why should not their theories be right and his wrong? ‘It matters very little to any one except myself, whether I am a little more or less wrong on this or that point; in fact, I am sure to be proved wrong on many points.’[85] Of one who did not agree with him he could say: ‘I know nothing of him excepting from his letters: these show remarkable talent, astonishing perseverance, much modesty, and what I admire, determined difference from me on many points.’[86] And how winning is his defense of blunderers, of those who do poor work which is not all poor: ‘Shall you think me very impudent if I tell you that I have sometimes thought that ... you are a little too hard on bad observers; that a remark made by a bad observer cannot be right; an observer who deserves to be damned you would utterly damn. I feel entire deference to any remark you make out of your own head; but when in opposition to some poor devil, I somehow involuntarily feel not quite so much.’[87]

The truth is, that Darwin’s tolerance was based, as all real tolerance is apt to be, on the vast and haunting sense of his own ignorance. Again and again he repeats and emphasizes how little he knows, how little any one knows, and how petty, imperfect, and inadequate are the efforts of any and[Pg 81] all of us to penetrate the veil of shrouding mystery which involves the deepest secrets of life. To probe this mystery the vague and flickering torch of reason is all that is given to us. And those who are most conversant with reason and make most use of it mistrust it most. When the far surer guidance of instinct fails us, reason is our only support, and we must employ it not only for the larger speculative purposes, but for the practical decisions. At its best, it is a bright and splendid instrument, incredibly keen and penetrating, and able to accomplish miracles in the hands of those who manipulate it skillfully. But it is an instrument as delicate as it is bright, and it loses point and edge, unless constant pains are taken to keep it in working condition. Also, it cuts both ways, and every way, and to even the expert manipulator, perhaps to him most of all, it is apt to be difficult, dangerous, treacherous.

There is the subtle, unfathomable connection of reason with our wishes, desires, and prejudices. A clever Frenchman said that reason was given us to enable us to justify the gratification of our passions, and when we see how the devices of logic may be used to work from any premises to any conclusion, one feels the force of the Frenchman’s view.

[Pg 82]

No one was more aware than Darwin of these dangers and difficulties of reason, or of the endless possibilities of deception when one gives oneself up to that enchanting and deluding siren. He often emphasizes his distress and almost despair at finding himself making deductions quite different from those which others draw from the same facts. ‘It is really disgusting and humiliating to see directly opposite conclusions drawn from the same facts.’[88] And again: ‘Nothing is so vexatious to me, as so constantly finding myself drawing different conclusions from better judges than myself, from the same facts.’[89] And yet again: ‘I hate beyond all things finding myself in disagreement with any capable judge, when the premises are the same.’[90]

These comments make us see clearly what Darwin’s relation to reason was. Few thinkers have been so ready, so fertile, so abundant, so ingenious, yet at the same time so sober, so restrained and controlled.

With this analysis of his observation and his thought we are ready to take up the supreme interest of Darwin’s life, the dramatic study of the conception, elaboration, promulgation, and triumph of his evolutionary theory.

[Pg 83]

CHAPTER III
DARWIN: THE DISCOVERER
I
The word ‘evolution’ is so popularly accepted and so generally employed in connection with Darwin’s theories that it will never be displaced; but it is not wholly satisfactory, because it always suggests progress from a lower to a higher and hence involves a difficult and invidious definition of terms. Some such phrase as ‘descent with modification’ would probably be more exact. But whatever the term used, to associate it as a scientific theory or discovery exclusively with Darwin or any other one man would be absurd. The natural hypothesis of earlier thinkers was that divine creative power, in whatever shape, had established the different forms of life on the earth pretty much as they exist to-day. But those who looked more deeply, were inclined to surmise, in view of the close and evident bonds of kinship between all living things, that variety had developed from comparative unity and that the vital impulse, having first appeared in elementary forms, became gradually elaborated into more and more complicated organisms. The[Pg 84] vast pains that Darwin took to substantiate this view, together with his particular explanation of how the process came about, have forever bound up the idea of evolution with his name, but he did not originate it nor did he claim to have done so.

The various hints and manifestations of earlier evolutionary theory are admirably elucidated in Professor Osborn’s ‘From the Greeks to Darwin.’ The vast curiosity and reflection of Aristotle anticipated here, as everywhere, and some of his sentences have a striking evolutionary bearing: ‘Variety in animal life may be produced by variety of locality.’[389] ‘Locality will differentiate habits also; for instance, rugged highlands will not produce the same results as the soft lowlands.’[390] And Empedocles suggests Darwin’s views even more directly. Under the régime of Biblical and Christian tradition evolutionary thought naturally made little progress. But with the greater freedom of the eighteenth century, notions of modification by descent again appeared. In England Darwin’s grandfather, Erasmus, the botanical poet, speculated curiously on the subject, and there were various other intimations, notably in Chambers’s ‘Vestiges of Creation,’ while Darwin himself felt that he was much influenced by the geological theories of Lyell.[Pg 85] In Germany Goethe became profoundly interested in the metamorphoses of life. Especially in France Buffon and St.-Hilaire led up to the ‘Philosophie Zoologique’ of Lamarck, which propounded the theory of modification in a very definite form, and suggested the mode in which the modification was accomplished. Lamarck’s idea was that plants and animals, by an inborn, vital impulse, adapted themselves to their environment, and that these adaptations were transmitted by inheritance. Thus wading birds acquired webbed feet and the neck of the giraffe was elongated in its effort to obtain its food from the branches of the trees. The great stumbling-block of this theory has always been the difficulty of proving that acquired adaptations are inherited.[A]

FOOTNOTES:
[A]Investigators have of course worked constantly and persistently upon this point and I find Professor William McDougall quoted in a Boston Herald editorial of August 16, 1926, as saying: ‘Species may change and undergo evolution through the efforts of the individual parents to adapt themselves to conditions.’

What is of interest to us, however, is Darwin’s attitude toward his more immediate predecessors, Buffon, Lamarck, Chambers, etc. This attitude has been a matter of much comment by Samuel Butler and others and it is not perfectly easy to understand. That Darwin in his earlier thinking as [Pg 86]well as in his later was influenced by previous investigators is evident enough, for instance in touches like that in the ‘Voyage of the Beagle’: ‘Nature by making habit omnipotent, and its effects hereditary, has fitted the Fuegian to the climate and productions of his miserable country.’[391] Also, his frequent comments show that he knew what had been written before him and had profited by it, and in the later editions of the ‘Origin’ he took some pains to acknowledge the obligation. Yet his tone in his letters is by no means respectful and of Lamarck especially, who had done the most, it is difficult for him to speak without a sneer. Thus, in 1844 he writes: ‘Heaven forefend me from Lamarck nonsense of a “tendency to progression,” “adaptations from the slow willing of animals,” etc.! But the conclusions I am led to are not widely different from his; though the means of change are wholly so.’[392] Again, a little later: ‘With respect to books on this subject, I do not know any systematical ones, except Lamarck’s which is veritable rubbish.’[393] And later still, in 1859, he writes to Lyell: ‘You often allude to Lamarck’s work; I do not know what you think about it, but it appeared to me extremely poor; I got not a fact or idea from it.’[394]

Various explanations of Darwin’s treatment of[Pg 87] Lamarck have been offered. One at least, that of a disposition to run down a predecessor from jealousy, we may exclude as absolutely as is possible with poor human nature. Everything we know of Darwin in other connections justifies us in doing this. Professor Osborn, after referring to ‘the disdainful allusions to him [Lamarck] by Charles Darwin (the only writer of whom Darwin ever spoke in this tone)’[395] observes that ‘it is very evident from all Darwin’s criticisms of Lamarck, that he had never studied him carefully in the original.’[396] But against this view we have to set Darwin’s own comment (italics mine): ‘What I consider, after two deliberate readings, as a wretched book, and one from which (I well remember my surprise) I gained nothing.’[397] It is true that Darwin, as in the quotation above as to ‘adaptations from the slow willing of animals,’ apparently misinterpreted Lamarck’s view of the self-adaptation of the individual to its environment into the absurd assumption that animals and even plants deliberately willed their own evolutionary progress; but on the other hand Darwin all his life and especially in his later period wavered toward Lamarck’s adaptation theories. It has been suggested that in Darwin’s university years French thought and French scientists were[Pg 88] distinctly in disfavor and that Darwin imbibed an enduring dislike of them.[398] Darwin himself hints that he may have been influenced by a prejudice in favor of his grandfather as Lamarck’s predecessor. But it seems more probable that he disliked Lamarck because he regarded him as a theorist and speculator who did not found his argument on a sufficiently broad basis of fact, whereas Darwin toiled for years at observation and experiment before he gave his theory to the world at all. This explanation is indicated in Darwin’s remark to Lyell: ‘As for Lamarck, as you have such a man as Grove with you, you are triumphant; not that I can alter my opinion that to me it was an absolutely useless book. Perhaps this was owing to my always searching books for facts.’[399] In any case one cannot help wishing that Darwin had spoken of a man so prominent and so highly esteemed as Lamarck a little differently.

II
Darwin first began to be interested in the idea of modification by descent during his voyage on the Beagle and in the year 1837.[400] In his earlier years he had been satisfied with the conventionally orthodox theological and scientific conception of [Pg 89]the creation of distinct species, and all his youthful work had been on the basis of this view. Such phrases as the note, written in 1834, in Valparaiso: ‘It seems not a very improbable conjecture that the want of animals may be owing to none having been created since this country was raised from the sea,’[401] are obviously significant of the earlier attitude. But as he observed more widely and became more and more impressed with the infinite diversity of forms and the delicacy of shading with which they pass into each other, the conviction grew that the possibilities of development were unlimited, and that individual differences might pass into varieties and these again into species, making the origin of varied life far simpler and more unified than had ever been imagined. And such an evolutionary process seemed much more in accord with general natural laws than the abrupt appearance of fixed, highly organized forms in sudden sufficiency. As he says, ‘the subject haunted me,’ and from a very early period he began making notes and memoranda of all observations that might bear for—or against—the gradual modification of species.


A PAGE FROM A NOTEBOOK OF 1837

The difficulty was to imagine just how the process of modification was brought about, and until he could get some light on this point, his enthusiasm[Pg 90] for the general idea was chilled and baffled. As we have seen, Lamarck’s view, that living beings directly adapted themselves to their surroundings and then transmitted these adaptations to their descendants, seemed at least inadequate, and Darwin felt that the theory must have some more solid basis, if it was to prevail at all. He set his mind to work for months and months, and he applied the intellectual method which he himself has so admirably defined in a letter to his young son: ‘I have been speculating last night what makes a man a discoverer of undiscovered things; and a most perplexing problem it is. Many men who are very clever—much cleverer than the discoverers—never originate anything. As far as I can conjecture, the art consists in habitually searching for the causes and meaning of everything which occurs.’[402]

Searching for the cause and meaning of everything which occurred, he at last achieved the discovery he was looking for, and so knew what is assuredly one of the greatest of spiritual delights. Largely by watching and studying the results of deliberate human selection with plants and animals, he was led to his great principle of natural selection, that is, assuming the tendency in all living beings to vary individually, that in the intense[Pg 91] struggle for existence those variations which are beneficial and help the organism to live and prosper will be preserved and transmitted. The causes of variation, whether spontaneous or to be found in environment, Darwin never pretended entirely to explain. Of the principle of natural selection, or as Spencer phrased it in a form which Darwin admitted to be in some respects more satisfactory, ‘the survival of the fittest,’ perhaps its discoverer has given no better statement than the sentences in the second volume of the great work on ‘Plants and Animals under Domestication’: ‘To consider the subject under this point of view is enough to strike one dumb with amazement. But our amazement ought to be lessened when we reflect that beings almost infinite in number, during an almost infinite lapse of time, have often had their whole organization rendered in some degree plastic, and that each slight modification of structure which was in any way beneficial under excessively complex conditions of life has been preserved, whilst each which was in any way injurious has been rigorously destroyed. And the long-continued accumulation of beneficial variations will infallibly have led to structures as diversified, as beautifully adapted for various purposes, and as excellently[Pg 92] coördinated, as we see in the animals around us. Hence I have spoken of selection as the paramount power, whether applied by man to the formation of domestic breeds, or by nature to the production of species.’[403]

It is not to be supposed that the first grasp of evolution through variation and natural selection could have carried with it the full foresight of the enormous changes, mental, moral, and spiritual, that such a theory was likely to produce. Still, a mind so keen and active as Darwin’s was bound to catch some suggestion of those changes. For instance, the astonishing and deadly ease with which the old workings of Providential adaptation and design slipped under the new light into mere operations of mechanical law could not fail to foreshadow the philosophical and theological upheaval that was sure to follow. A spirit trained in the conventional atmosphere of the early English nineteenth century must necessarily have regarded such an upheaval with a certain amount of question, awe, and even dismay; and Darwin indisputably had something of these feelings mingled with the triumphant joy of discovery.

It is profoundly characteristic of the man that he did not hasten to fling the discovery to the[Pg 93] world, to get the immediate excitement and glory, leaving discussion and substantiation to come afterwards. He was so hesitant, so doubtful of his own methods and his own powers, that he delayed even to commit his conjectures to writing in his note-books, lest they should become hardened and distorted by the prejudice of statement and so misleading. His one idea was to get confirmation, by every line of study and experiment, and for twenty years he toiled with deliberate patience before he was willing to make the attempt to put his results into publishable shape.

And all the time there was the chance, perfectly present to his mind, that death might prevent him from ever making the discovery known. And all the time there was the chance that in the world of scientific thought that was seething about him some one else might anticipate him and propagate the idea, perhaps in a form less convincing and less substantial than he would be able to give it. Just as he was getting to the stage of preparation which he had aimed at, exactly this thing seemed likely to happen. In June 1858, Alfred Russel Wallace, a scientist of standing and ability, with whom Darwin had corresponded, sent him a paper largely anticipating Darwin’s ideas on natural selection,[Pg 94] so largely that Darwin wrote of it to Lyell: ‘I never saw a more striking coincidence; if Wallace had my MS. sketch written out in 1842, he could not have made a better short abstract; ... so all my originality, whatever it may amount to, will be smashed.’[404] And he even doubted whether he should make his views public at all, for fear of depriving Wallace of credit: ‘I would far rather burn my whole book, than that he or any other man should think that I had behaved in a paltry spirit.’[405] The difficulty was adjusted, however, by friends, and a joint paper by Darwin and Wallace both, was read at the meeting of the Linnæan Society on July 1, 1858, giving the world the first inkling of what natural selection was to mean. Sir Joseph Hooker wrote prophetically of this meeting: ‘The interest excited was intense, but the subject was too novel and too ominous for the old school to enter the lists, before armoring. After the meeting it was talked over with bated breath.’[406]

The relation between Darwin and Wallace in regard to priority of discovery is one of the finest things in the whole history of science. There was no jealousy, no bitterness, no acrimony, but instead a full recognition of each others’ achievements, and a sympathetic understanding which ripened into[Pg 95] a helpful and unbroken friendship. Wallace’s statement of the matter long after Darwin’s death, is as noble in its unselfishness as words can make it: ‘But what is often forgotten by the press and the public is that the idea occurred to Darwin in 1838 ... nearly twenty years earlier than to myself, and that during the whole twenty years he had been laboring collecting evidence from the vast mass of literature of biology, of horticulture, and of agriculture.... Such being the facts of the case, I should have had no cause for complaint if the respective shares of Darwin and myself ... had been henceforth estimated as being roughly proportioned to the time we had each bestowed upon it ... that is to say, as twenty years to one week.’[407] Darwin’s summary, more general, is equally worthy of both: ‘I hope it is a satisfaction to you to reflect—and very few things in my life have been more satisfactory to me—that we have never felt any jealousy towards each other, though in one sense rivals. I believe that I can say this of myself with truth, and I am absolutely sure that it is true of you.’[408]

The first promulgation of the Darwinian ideas, with those of Wallace, was therefore made in July, 1858. In the following year, November, 1859, ‘The[Pg 96] Origin of Species’ was published. Darwin himself regarded this book as a mere preliminary sketch, requiring to be supported and buttressed by confirmatory evidence of all sorts. But it at once overwhelmed the world, and has always been looked upon since as the cardinal statement of the theory. As Huxley said of it, ‘It is doubtful if any single book, except the “Principia,” ever worked so great and so rapid a revolution in science, or made so deep an impression on the general mind.’[409] And innumerable quotations could be drawn from other sources to the same effect.

III
The study of the complication of motives that prompts a man like Darwin, and many others, to reveal and establish a great scientific discovery in spite of violent opposition is profoundly curious and profitable. It seems to me that a main element in these motives, with the scientist, as with the artist and the politician and the actor and the preacher and the athlete alike, is ambition. As Darwin himself expresses it: ‘The action of unconscious selection, as far as pigeons are concerned, depends on a universal principle in human nature, namely on our rivalry, and desire to outdo our[Pg 97] neighbors. We see this in every fleeting fashion, even in our dress.’[410] And again: ‘Man is the rival of other men; he delights in competition, and this leads to ambition which passes too easily into selfishness.’[411] The concrete essence of ambition is the desire for fame, to have one’s efforts, one’s powers, one’s achievement, one’s ego, recognized, appraised, established by the applause and commendation of one’s fellow-men. And surely this desire in itself is a natural and even a laudable one, leading, as it does, to most useful and enduring accomplishment. The drawback is that the thirst for glory is so enticing, so overmastering, that it seduces men into strange and dubious methods of obtaining it. Glory, or notoriety, is got so often by base means, the trickster and the charlatan can so often snatch its rewards and laurels from honest labor and even from genius divinely endowed, that sincere and earnest spirits are impelled to disclaim the pursuit altogether, and to insist, perhaps with genuine self-deception, that fame as a motive hardly enters into their struggle at all. This contention is maintained the more easily, since it is evident that other motives, and those most powerful, do enter in. There is the restless, ever active disposition of human nature to be doing something, almost no[Pg 98] matter what. To work, to create, to achieve, is to live. Nothing else can properly be called life. To have done great things, to be doing them, makes you feel that you exist, and why should you vex yourself with what other men think of them? Then for the scientist there is the sheer delight of adding one grain of truth to the slow accumulation of the centuries, as for the artist there is the splendid sense of having created something beautiful. You know it, you feel it: what do the others matter? And there is further the rich reward of believing, or hoping, that you are doing even a little to help or to enlighten your fellow-men, whether they are ever aware of it or not. Few things are more soothing or cheering to the soul than that. So that there have been thinkers and there have been artists who have said, and perhaps sincerely thought: ‘I care not if some other man gets the credit of my work altogether. So the work is done, and I have done it, and know that I have done it, and it endures, and is worthy to endure, what does the name or the glory of it matter?’ There are many who have said this, there may be some who have meant it; but surely there are few who have tried to do great things, and have not longed for the human recognition of them; and why should they not?

[Pg 99]

It is peculiarly interesting to trace the play of these motives in Darwin, because here, as everywhere, he has such an extraordinary, intimate frankness of revelation. The love of fame was strong in him, and he knew it. He tells us of his childhood: ‘Some other recollections are those of vanity—namely, thinking that people were admiring me, in one instance for perseverance and another for boldness in climbing a low tree, and what is odder, a consciousness, as if instinctive, that I was vain, and contempt of myself.’[412] Of his earlier scientific years he writes: ‘I was also ambitious to take a fair place among scientific men ... whether more ambitious or less so than most of my fellow-workers, I can form no opinion.’[413] At a much later period he still recognizes the same stimulus: ‘Without you have a very much greater soul than I have (and I believe that you have), you will find the medal a pleasant little stimulus; when work goes badly, and one ruminates that all is vanity, it is pleasant to have some tangible proof, that others have thought something of one’s labors.’[414] And how charming is the frank admission that he hates to have glory snatched away from him: ‘I always thought it very possible that I might be forestalled, but I fancied that I had a grand enough soul not to[Pg 100] care; but I found myself mistaken and punished.’[415] Certainly in him the tranquil appreciation that there was a something of inborn power can hardly be set down to the inferiority complex, and inborn power does yearn for outward applause: ‘Looking back, I infer that there must have been something in me a little superior to the common run of youths, otherwise the above-mentioned men, so much older than me and higher in academical position, would never have allowed me to associate with them.’[416]

Yet with the passage of years and the growing sense of the futility and injustice of popular reputation, Darwin was more and more disposed to disclaim all interest in it. The desire for glory, he admits, is a universal human motive, and a natural one; but there are others of as much, if not more account: ‘You do me injustice when you think that I work for fame; I value it to a certain extent; but, if I know myself, I work from a sort of instinct to try to make out truth.’[417] To the very end it is clear that the sale of his books and the public discussion of his ideas are pleasant to him, perhaps more pleasant than he recognizes. But assuredly no man can be said to be unduly hungry for the laudation of the mob who waits patiently for[Pg 101] twenty years before making public his claims to it. And it is certain that never under any circumstances would Darwin have descended to court it by base means or false pretences. As he himself sums up the whole matter, speaking of his youth: ‘All this shows how ambitious I was; but I think I can say with truth that in after years, though I cared in the highest degree for the approbation of such men as Lyell and Hooker, who were my friends, I did not care much about the general public. I do not mean to say that a favorable review or a large sale of my books did not please me greatly, but the pleasure was a fleeting one, and I am sure that I have never turned one inch out of my course to gain fame.’[418] We certainly have here no extreme or morbid case of notoriety-seeking.

IV
Thus, in 1859, ‘The Origin of Species’ startled the world with the theory of evolution through natural selection, a theory which immediately raised a storm that in some of its aspects is still raging. It is occasionally urged that Darwin’s reputation and success had an element of good fortune in them, that, as with so many discoveries, he simply happened to express and as it were crystallize[Pg 102] general ideas that were vaguely present to many and needed only a vigorous expositor to give them universal acceptance. Doubtless there is a measure of truth in this view. Yet it must not be forgotten how much Darwin’s character, his tact and reasonableness, his persistent energetic logic, above all the enormous industry and fidelity of his research entered into his final triumph. His own comment on this matter of the timeliness of his theories is exceedingly interesting: ‘It has sometimes been said that the success of the “Origin” proved “that the subject was in the air,” or “that men’s minds were prepared for it.” I do not think that this is strictly true, for I occasionally sounded not a few naturalists, and never happened to come across a single one who seemed to doubt about the permanence of species.... I tried once or twice to explain to able men what I meant by Natural Selection, but signally failed. What I believe was strictly true is that innumerable well-observed facts were stored in the minds of naturalists ready to take their proper places as soon as any theory which would receive them was sufficiently explained.’[419]

In any case, the evolutionary theory, when first propagated, was bitterly attacked, both by scientists[Pg 103] and by others. Darwin’s personal friends, and some of the younger men, who were less hardened in conservatism, supported him, though with more or less hesitation and reserve. But scientists of the older school, trained in established traditions, were generally most unfavorable. Some of them brought up the innumerable difficulties of which Darwin himself was only too well aware. Others resorted to the usual weapons of abuse and sarcasm. Owen in England and Agassiz in America represented perhaps the strongest conservative views. To them the Darwinian system was merely a passing heresy, which could not stand for a moment against the array of facts and arguments which they could bring from their vast experience and observation of the natural world.

The hostility of religious circles, aroused by the ‘Origin’ and increased by the later books, especially ‘The Descent of Man,’ was fiercer and less discriminating than that of the scientists. Perhaps the acme of it was reached in the savage interchange in which the Bishop of Oxford asked Huxley whether he ‘was related by his grandfather’s or grandmother’s side to an ape’ and Huxley retorted that a man had no reason to be ashamed of having an ape for a grandfather, but if he were to feel shame,[Pg 104] it would be for an ancestor ‘who not content with an equivocal success in his own sphere of activity, plunges into scientific questions with which he has no real acquaintance, only to obscure them by an aimless rhetoric, and distract the attention of his hearers from the real point at issue by eloquent digressions, and skilled appeals to religious prejudice.’[420]

This sort of thing was by no means agreeable to Darwin, and he repeatedly refers to the pain and distress it caused him. For example: ‘I have just read the “Edinburgh,” which without doubt is by ——. It is extremely malignant, clever, and I fear will be very damaging. He is atrociously severe on Huxley’s lecture, and very bitter against Hooker. So we three enjoyed it together. Not that I really enjoyed it, for it made me uncomfortable for one night; but I have got quite over it to-day. It requires much study to appreciate all the bitter spite of many of the remarks against me; indeed I did not discover all myself.... It is painful to be hated in the intense degree with which —— hates me.’[421]

What interests us is the attitude of Darwin in all the aspects of the struggle, and we find everywhere manifested and illustrated the mental and spiritual[Pg 105] qualities which we have analyzed generally in the preceding chapters. Long and cruel as the controversy was, that large, tranquil disposition could not be warped or embittered, or substantially shaken in its kindly serenity.

And first there is the candor, the readiness to admit mistakes and errors, and to recognize the force and significance of an opponent’s view and arguments. Darwin himself complains humorously of a weakness in this regard: ‘My God, is not the case difficult enough, without its being, as I must think, falsely made more difficult? I believe it is my own fault—, my d——d candor.’[422] But, damned or not, it is a quality worth admiration. As Professor Osborn excellently puts it: ‘If he were living, ... he would be in the front line of inquiry, armed with matchless assemblage of fact, with experiment verification, and not least with incomparable candor and good-will. This bequest of a noble method is hardly less precious than the immortal content of “The Origin of Species” itself.’[423]

This is the language of an admirer. But it is curious to see how with critics and opponents

‘To some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies.’
Thus, even Alexander Agassiz, who was much more[Pg 106] favorably disposed to evolution and to Darwin than was his father, remarks on this point of candor: ‘I was somewhat surprised in Darwin’s Life to see the element of wishing his cause to succeed as a cause brought out so prominently. The one thing always claimed by Darwin’s friends had been his absolute impartiality to his own case. Certainly his correspondence with Hooker, Huxley, and Gray shows no such thing.’[424] And others, distinctly more hostile, are much more severe, declaring that Darwin’s passionate eagerness to prove his point was quite incompatible with any real fairness or breadth. But surely there is misunderstanding here. Any one can be impartial who is perfectly indifferent, and when you care not which side triumphs, there is no merit in seeing the justice of both. The charm and the interest of Darwin are precisely that he was devoted to his own theory, that it was the effort of his life to prove it, and yet that at the same time he could and did look for all the facts against it and even go to excess in allowing weight to the objections that could be opposed to him.

And as the candor was all the more notable because of the enthusiasm, so it was notable because it did not spring from a cold temperament, or[Pg 107] an incapacity for natural human anger and indignation. Darwin enlarges, perhaps unduly, on his heat of temper in youth; and in age, though his control and his patience got the better of this, still the sparks would fly when unjust and unreasonable attack annoyed and irritated him. Thus, he cries out in regard to Owen: ‘You would laugh if you could see how indignant all Owen’s mean conduct about E. Columbi made me. I did not get to sleep till past 3 o’clock.’[425] And again, ‘If Owen wrote the article “Oken” and the French work on the Archetype ..., he never did a baser act.... You are so good a Christian that you will hardly understand how I chuckle over this bit of baseness.’[426] When an adversary, not content with rational argument, resorted to personal attack: ‘I care not for his dull, unvarying abuse of me, and singular misrepresentation. But at p. 244 he in fact doubts my deliberate word, and that is the act of a man who has not the soul of a gentleman in him.’[427]

But, however at moments indignation might get the better of him, Darwin, as we have already seen, rarely allowed himself to be drawn into anything approaching controversy. Intelligent argument with those who had reasonable objections might be profitable, but where was the use of contending[Pg 108] with those whose object was not to convince but to prevail? ‘I do so hate controversy,’ he cries, ‘and feel I shall do it so badly.’[428] And elsewhere he writes, more generally: ‘All that I think is that you will excite anger, and that anger so completely blinds every one, that your arguments would have no chance of influencing those who are already opposed to our views.’[349]

With this general attitude, it is interesting to find Darwin, in one of his few temptations to sharp retort, checked and repressed by the great fighter Huxley. Darwin submits the draft of a crisp letter, asking Huxley to criticize, and the latter suggests omissions: ‘Though Thomson deserved it and more, I thought it would be better to refrain. If I say a savage thing, it is only “Pretty Fanny’s way”; but if you do, it is not likely to be forgotten.’[350] Huxley and other friends also restrained Darwin in perhaps the most annoying of his controversial affairs, that with Samuel Butler over the translation of Krause’s Life of Erasmus Darwin. It is not necessary for us to attempt to unthread the complicated tangle of this dispute, since we may start with the confident assumption that both men were perfectly sincere in their good intentions. The curious may read the whole story in the Life of Butler by Henry[Pg 109] Festing Jones, and it is pleasant to find that the biographers of Butler and of Darwin were able to come together and by comparing unprinted documents straighten out the difficulty to their mutual satisfaction.

With his fellow-workers, those who were following the same lines of research from the same general point of view, Darwin’s relations were most cordial and sympathetic. There was no jealousy, no rivalry, no undue sensitiveness. We have indeed seen that in his treatment of his predecessors, notably Lamarck, there was a suggestion of what in any one else might be taken for a jealous attitude. But all the dealings with Wallace nobly refute the possibility of any such suggestion. And at all times and under all circumstances Darwin was ready to recognize and to proclaim the merits and achievements of those who were laboring beside him. When there was any question of priority in an idea or a discovery, he refused to assert himself unduly: ‘I have always had a strong feeling that no one had better defend his own priority. I cannot say that I am as indifferent to the subject as I ought to be, but one can avoid doing anything in consequence.’[351] When a scientist, whether known or unknown, applied to him for[Pg 110] assistance or suggestion, he was always ready to supply it, so far as was in his power. Above all, he was appreciative, almost to excess, of any assistance that was rendered to him, and his gratitude to his friends for supporting and sustaining him and forwarding his views is touching in its naïve earnestness. To Huxley, to Hooker, to Lyell, to Gray, to Häckel, to a dozen others, he speaks with enthusiastic acknowledgment of their efforts and their contributions, and, as Huxley points out, he was ready to bestow almost the same gratitude for services that in themselves appeared to be absurdly insignificant.

For he had a singular humility, most notable and appealing in a man of such distinguished power and achievement. ‘A mind conspicuous for its powerful humility and strong gentleness,’ is Huxley’s vivid characterization.[278] Again and again he expresses distrust of his powers, sense of inadequacy and incompetence, keen consciousness of limitation. Such phrases as the following from the book on Orchids, are constantly recurring: ‘To any one with more knowledge than I possess, it would be an interesting subject to trace the gradations between the several species and groups of species in this great and closely-connected order.’[279] Sometimes[Pg 111] the expression of humility is direct. ‘Any one with ordinary faculties, if he had patience enough and plenty of time could have written my book.’[280] Sometimes there is a humorous assertion of the contrary which is quite as significant: ‘I should rather think there was a good chance of my becoming the most egotistical man in Europe. What a proud preëminence!’[281] Occasionally the profession of humility is so extreme, as in the sentence in regard to Owen, ‘The Londoners say he is mad with envy because my book has been talked about; what a strange man to be envious of a naturalist like myself, immeasurably his inferior!’[282] that critics disposed to find fault have discerned something of affectation in it. It is of the nature of the deepest humility always to expose itself to such accusations as this; but surely no one can study Darwin carefully, can be familiar with his work in all its aspects, and not set him down as one of the most sincerely humble spirits that ever lived.

V
This humility and feeling of his own incompetence made Darwin keenly alive to the difficulties connected with his great undertaking and gave him[Pg 112] such a clear sense of them that at times he felt incapable of solving them at all. As he says in the sixth chapter of the ‘Origin’: ‘Long before the reader has arrived at this part of my work, a crowd of difficulties will have occurred to him. Some of them are so serious that to this day I can hardly reflect on them without being in some degree staggered.’[283]

Take one of the most striking, if not the most crucial difficulties, one which puzzled and perplexed Darwin from the first and was made a fruitful text for criticism by his adversaries, the development of the eye. Was it to be supposed that so delicate, so complex, and so highly adapted an organ could be produced by mere accidental variation working through inheritance and the gradual survival of the fittest? And Darwin investigated and compared and reflected, until he was ready to state his position thus: ‘Reason tells me, that if numerous gradations from a simple and imperfect eye to one complex and perfect can be shown to exist, each grade being useful to its possessor, as is certainly the case; if further the eye ever varies and the variations be inherited, as is likewise certainly the case; and if such variations should be useful to any animal under changing conditions of life, then the difficulty[Pg 113] of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection, though insuperable by our imagination, should not be considered subversive of the theory.’[284]

Sometimes the difficulties appear in themselves insignificant, yet their bearing is such as to make them of extreme importance. For example, how the useful institution of neuter insects could be developed by inheritance was a terrible problem. It ‘at first appeared to me insuperable, and actually fatal to the whole theory.’[285] Study and observation wear it away; yet it is disposed of with the candid remark: ‘I must confess, that, with all my faith in natural selection, I should never have anticipated that this principle could have been efficient in so high a degree, had not the case of these neuter insects led me to this conclusion.’[286] Or there is the coloring of the peacock’s tail, which has to be explained by extreme wrestlings of logical ingenuity. And again, as compared with these seemingly petty obstacles, there are the great questions involved in the essential tissue of the theory itself. There are the gaps, the breaks, the missing links, not only between man and his simian ancestors, but completing all the gradations between all the existing forms of development. Many and[Pg 114] many an hour, and one may say, many a year of anxious thought did Darwin bestow on this point. He could meet it only with such eager comment as he makes after his prolonged study of the orchids: ‘In the comparatively few orchids described in this volume, so many and such plainly-marked gradations in the structure of the rostellum have been described, ... that we may well believe, if we could see every orchid which has ever existed throughout the world, we should find all the gaps in the existing chain, and every gap in many lost chains, filled up by a series of easy transitions.’[287] And there were such vast problems as sexual selection and pangenesis, which we discussed in a previous chapter, and there was even the central element of natural selection itself, which in darker moments seemed but a weak agency for sustaining the whole world: ‘If I think continuously on some half-dozen structures of which we can at present see no use, I can persuade myself that natural selection is of quite subordinate importance.’[288]

The interesting aspect of this matter of difficulty, as with other things, is Darwin’s way of meeting and facing it. There was an excitement, a stimulus, undoubtedly, a joy in attacking tough problems and conquering them. But there was also a pervading[Pg 115] consciousness of what the difficulties were, and some have even thought an almost too pervading disposition to go out of one’s way to deal with them. As Huxley puts it: One ‘who desires to attack Mr. Darwin has only to read his works with a desire to observe not their merits but their defects, and he will find ready to hand more adverse suggestions than are likely ever to have suggested themselves to his own sharpness, without Mr. Darwin’s self-denying aid.’[289]

And there is always the appreciation, in handling the difficulties, of the danger in over-ingenuity, of the subtle possibilities of betrayal by reason ever toiling with intense ardor to arrive at its preconceived ends. ‘God knows I have never shirked a difficulty,’ said Darwin.[290] But the danger lies not only in shirking, but in the dissolving, transforming power of prejudice and enthusiasm. Here again Darwin tried to be ever on his guard: ‘I am fairly rabid on the question, and therefore, if not wrong already, am pretty sure to become so.’[291] He would not be misled, or fooled, or betrayed: ‘As I read on, I felt not a little dumbfounded, and thought to myself that whenever I came to this subject I should have to be savage against myself.’[292]

But you can never be sure that you have been[Pg 116] savage enough, and there are moments when unexpected obstacles make you mistrust your theory, mistrust your method, mistrust your reasoning power. ‘If it could be proved that any part of the structure of any one species had been formed for the exclusive good of another species, it would annihilate my theory.’[293] And who knows that it cannot be proved? After months of study, a clear statement of opposing facts seems for the moment to demolish everything. ‘You give all the facts so clearly and fully, that it is impossible to help speculating on the subject; but it drives me to despair, for I cannot gulp down your continent; and not to be able to do so gives, in my eyes, the multiple creationists an awful triumph.’[294] And with his extraordinary gift of direct self-revelation, Darwin sums up the state of mind in one vivid sentence: ‘Your letter actually turned me sick with panic.’[295]

Thus there are times of discouragement and disgust. One gets to feel that one has utterly overestimated one’s work and one’s powers. One concocts ‘pleasant little stinging remarks for reviews, such as “Mr. Darwin’s head seems to have been turned by a certain degree of success, and he thinks that the most trifling observations are worth publication.”’[296] One concludes that all the years[Pg 117] of vast labor have been given to no valid result and that one had better have cultivated one’s cabbages with health and quietness: ‘At present I feel sick of everything, and if I could occupy my time and forget my daily discomforts, or rather miseries, I would never publish another word.’[297] Such periods of depression in Darwin are peculiarly interesting, because he was by no means of a melancholy temperament, nor, in spite of his nervous weakness, was he inclined to a fretful or morbid pessimism. Yet, even with all his courage and all his patience, with all his past labor and all his victory, there were moments toward the end when the grave seemed inviting for its mere vastness of repose, without any definite prospect of anything further: ‘I am rather despondent about myself, and my troubles are of an exactly opposite nature to yours, for idleness is downright misery to me, as I find here, as I cannot forget my discomfort for an hour. I have not the heart or strength at my age to begin any investigation lasting years, which is the only thing which I enjoy; and I have no little jobs which I can do. So I must look forward to Down graveyard as the sweetest place on earth.’[Pg 118][372]

VI
The recognition and the accumulation of difficulties naturally involved modification of views. Indeed any really vital theory is bound to develop and modify itself with the vitality of the man who holds it. And Darwin was as vital as any man, and his theories as vital as any ever were. No man ever recognized more fully than he the desirability, the necessity of modification: ‘I look at it as absolutely certain that very much in the Origin will be proved rubbish; but I expect and hope that the framework will stand.’[373] He groans over the burden and difficulty of perpetual correcting: ‘I am grieved to hear that you think I must work in the notes in the text; but you are so much better a judge that I will obey.’[374] Again: ‘It is only about two years since last edition of Origin, and I am disgusted to find how much I have to modify, and how much I ought to add.’[375] Nevertheless, as the successive editions of the ‘Origin’ and the other books show, he continued to add and to alter and to correct, to the very end. The minute, thoughtful, and far-reaching character of these alterations shows well in the concluding sentence of the eleventh chapter of the ‘Origin,’ which in the first edition read, ‘old forms having been supplanted by new and improved forms of life[Pg 119] produced by the laws of variation still acting round us and preserved by natural selection,’ and later, ‘old forms having been supplanted by new and improved forms of life, the products of Variation and the Survival of the Fittest.’

Besides revision in detail, there was of course always a tendency to larger modifications of the general theory. Ingenious and far-reaching as natural selection was, the difficulties connected with it were so immense, that the loyalty of even its discoverer at times necessarily wavered, or perhaps we should say better, his enthusiasm heated and cooled. Moreover, natural selection depended upon variation, and variation to Darwin was always an inexplicable puzzle, for which no solution or too many might be found. Disinclined as he was to accept or even to respect his predecessors, Buffon and Lamarck, Darwin in later years, when the pressure on natural selection became fiercer, seemed to turn more to the adaptive solutions of these predecessors. As Professor Morgan puts it: ‘Despite the contempt with which Darwin referred to Lamarck’s theory, he himself, as we have seen, often made use of the principle of the inheritance of acquired characters, and even employed the same illustrations cited by Lamarck.’[376] And Professor[Pg 120] Osborn indicates admirably the gradual process of the change which took place in Darwin’s attitude: ‘Starting with some leaning towards the theories of modification of Buffon and Lamarck, he reached an almost exclusive belief in his own theory, and then gradually inclined to adopt Buffon’s and then Lamarck’s theories as well, until in his maturest writings he embraced a threefold causation in the origin of species.’[377] The drift towards Lamarck is well shown in a passage of a letter to Galton, written in 1875: ‘If this implies that many parts are not modified by use and disuse during the life of the individual, I differ widely from you, as every year I come to attribute more and more to such agency.’[378] At the same time, to the very end natural selection remained in Darwin’s mind not only the quintessence of his theorizing, but the prime agent by which modification had been accomplished. In ‘The Descent of Man’ he explains and in a manner excuses any earlier undue insistence upon it, but also reiterates his firm faith in its great, if not omnipotent efficacy: ‘If I have erred in giving to natural selection great power, which I am very far from admitting, or in having exaggerated its power, which is in itself probable, I have at least, as I hope, done good service in[Pg 121] aiding to overthrow the dogma of separate creations.’[379]

VII
So through the sixties and seventies the battle for evolution went merrily on, and before Darwin’s death in 1881 it was evident that the scientific world was largely converted and still more evident that the theory had taken solid hold upon the popular mind. Even in the sixties Charles Kingsley could write to F. D. Maurice: ‘The state of the scientific mind is most curious; Darwin is conquering everywhere, and rushing in like a flood, by the mere force of truth and fact.’[380] Darwin himself was no aggressive fighter, though perhaps his quiet, persistent, logical statement of facts went further than fighting. But he had fighting followers, and they pushed his cause with an energy and dogmatism which he himself could hardly have manifested. In England Spencer gave the theory the metaphysical and philosophical sanction and support which Darwin was not equipped to render, and the brilliant, ardent eloquence of Huxley paralyzed opponents with incisive argument and stinging ridicule. In America Asa Gray, the great botanist, was a convert from the beginning and a most helpful[Pg 122] disciple, and his aid was peculiarly welcome to Darwin, because Gray’s eager orthodoxy was useful in conciliating many whose prejudices would naturally have been most adverse. Darwin repeatedly spoke of Gray as understanding his ideas better and expounding them more effectively than almost any one. John Fiske was also a valuable champion from the more philosophical side. In Germany Weisman and Häckel were the most prominent apostles, and immensely effective, though, with thorough-going Teutonic logic, they were ready to push conclusions to lengths that were not always acceptable to Darwin himself.

The amount of popular interest is probably best shown in the extensive sale of Darwin’s books. ‘The Origin of Species’ was successful at once. It went through edition after edition, in Darwin’s lifetime six in all, and was translated into numerous foreign languages. The later books, even those of a more technical character, sold like popular fiction, and the last one, on the apparently uninviting subject of earthworms, found many readers everywhere.

Darwin was of course quite conscious of his growing triumph. Even hostility, animosity, execration, painful as they might be, afforded evidence of[Pg 123] power and achievement. And he would not have been human, had he not relished the varied testimony of respect and admiration which came to him from every quarter. His natural distrust of himself was so great that it was hard for him to believe in success, even when it came, and before it came, he deprecated any attempt to discount it: ‘Please do not say to any one that I thought my book on Species would be fairly popular, and have a fairly remunerative sale (which was the height of my ambition), for if it prove a dead failure, it would make me the more ridiculous.’[381] Yet, however one might shrink and distrust oneself, to enter a great scientific meeting and have every one present rise to do one honor was undeniably agreeable. And, with his unfailing frankness, Darwin admits that praise was pleasant, and one could not have too much of it, provided one felt that it was in a measure deserved: ‘You pay me a superb compliment, and as I have just said to my wife, I think my friends must perceive that I like praise, they give me such hearty doses.’[382] Also, with equal frankness, he makes it plain in his autobiographical sketch that he realizes how great the success was and that it implied a certain prospect of permanence: ‘My books have sold largely in England,[Pg 124] have been translated into many languages, and passed through several editions in foreign countries. I have heard it said that the success of a work abroad is the best test of its enduring value. I doubt whether this is at all trustworthy; but judged by this standard my name ought to last for a few years.’[383] When he died, he was unquestionably rated as one of the very first, if not the first, among the scientific men of his time.

And it is equally unquestionable that his reputation has rather increased than diminished ever since. ‘“Before and after Darwin” will always be the ante et post urbem conditam of biological history,’ says Professor Osborn.[384] Naturally Darwin’s theories have been criticized and attacked and largely modified by later investigations and discoveries. To Darwin himself variation, as the basis of natural selection, was the difficult, inexplicable point, and the experiments of Mendel, the mutation theory of De Vries, and many other lines of research have put the subject of variation in a new light. Natural Selection has been and will be the subject of controversy, both as to its working and as to the extent of its efficacy. Darwin’s inimitable caution left the way open for all these investigations, as is so well indicated in the excellent[Pg 125] sentence of Professor Whitehead: ‘Darwin’s own writings are for all time a model of refusal to go beyond the direct evidence and of careful retention of every possible hypothesis.’[385]

Yet, after fifty years of discussion and argument, Darwin’s main positions hold their own with extraordinary tenacity. In the very latest word on the subject Professor Parker says: ‘It is to the credit of Charles Darwin and his body of able supporters that the scientific world was finally brought to accept the principle of descent with modification and natural selection as the means whereby it was accomplished.’[386] Professor Conklin affirms that: ‘The only scientific explanation of such adjustment or fitness is Darwin’s principle of natural selection of the fit and elimination of the unfit, and it is eloquent testimony to the greatness of Darwin that more and more this great principle is being recognized as the only mechanistic explanation of adaptation.’[387] And Professor Osborn is equally emphatic: ‘In my opinion natural selection is the only cause of evolution which has thus far been discovered and demonstrated.’[388] While from a more abstractly philosophical point of view the emphatic recently written words of Professor Ralph Barton Perry, give ample support to the general Darwinian position:[Pg 126] ‘In truth there is no gulf between man and the animal. We cannot deny to the latter sensibility, memory, and intelligence. The facts which prove it would fill volumes.... The animal has feelings of mother love, attachment, and devotion. It differs from us in degree only; its “soul” is to ours what the bud is to the flower and fruit.’[234]

But, independent of all agreement or disagreement with Darwin’s theories, the striking thing is the consensus of scientists in praise of the man, and the recognition of his effort and method and life as a model for all scientific workers. It is rare that praise is so unalloyed, so persistent, and so complete. In this connection it is interesting to compare the nature of the glory of the poet, Shakespeare, for example, with that of the scientific writer. Shakespeare is not only remembered, he is read. Every successive generation takes up his plays for themselves, reads into them its own passions and experiences, and thus makes them a perennial possession of humanity, quite independent of their author. The works of Darwin, or of any other scientist, have no such enduring value for actual perusal. The curious study them for historical record. But for the mass of mankind and even of scientists, a large part of them has entered[Pg 127] into universal knowledge and may be read in any textbook, and the remainder has become obsolete and of no value except for what it meant in an earlier day. The scientist’s name becomes detached from the work, even though he remains great because he did it. Yet the name, in spite of being thus detached, perhaps all the more because it is detached, shines like a star through century after century.

[Pg 128]

CHAPTER IV
DARWIN: THE LOSER
I
At different times Darwin commented on the gradually increasing absorption of his life by scientific pursuits and on the consequent atrophy of other intellectual and spiritual interests, which in earlier days had meant a good deal to him. In other words he was illustrating the favorite text of Sainte-Beuve, ‘All longings fail except that to understand.’ Sometimes he expresses this loss with terse vigor: ‘It is an accursed evil to a man to become so absorbed in any subject as I am in mine.’[309] Or again: ‘It is a horrid bore to feel as I constantly do, that I am a withered leaf for every subject except Science. It sometimes makes me hate Science, though God knows I ought to be thankful for such a perennial interest, which makes me forget for some hours every day my accursed stomach.’[310] And elsewhere he analyzes it with more elaborate regretful curiosity: ‘My mind seems to have become a kind of machine for grinding general laws out of large collections of facts, but why this should have [Pg 129]caused the atrophy of that part of the brain alone, on which the higher tastes depend, I cannot conceive. A man with a mind more highly organized or better constituted than mine, would not, I suppose, have thus suffered; and if I had to live my life again, I would have made a rule to read some poetry or listen to some music at least once every week; for perhaps the parts of my brain now atrophied would thus have been kept active through use.’[311]


THE STUDY AT DOWN

Having recently had occasion to make a somewhat extended study of Darwin’s remarkable contemporary the evangelist D. L. Moody, I have been struck by this similarity of lack of general interest in both of them. Darwin was of course a far better educated man fundamentally than Moody. But in both, their very bigness and power made the one engrossing passion—about as different in the two cases as can be imagined—dwarf and drive out the varied distractions and desires which relieve and stimulate the curiosity or the indolence of more ordinary men. So far as Darwin is concerned, with the exaggeration natural to reminiscence, he perhaps somewhat overestimated both the original aptitude and the later atrophy. But it is exceedingly instructive to trace his relation to the various[Pg 130] occupations and experiences of life outside of the scientific.

Take first the external human interests, other than purely social. In the larger movements of history Darwin seems not to have been particularly well versed or to have concerned himself very much with them. Of course, in relying upon his volumes of published letters as evidence, we must remember that those volumes were naturally edited with a view in the main to scientific pursuits, and therefore it is to be expected that other interests should figure less conspicuously. Still the testimony, both positive and negative, to the unimportance of those interests is very decided. As to this matter of history, Darwin himself tells us that he read the historians in his youth. He even insists that when he had lost æsthetic pleasures, ‘books on history, biographies, and travels ... and essays on all sorts of subjects interest me as much as ever they did.’[312] Of his earlier life he records that ‘I used to sit for hours reading the historical plays of Shakespeare, generally in an old window in the thick walls of the school.’[313] Perhaps on this Shakespearean basis, he retains, with many other English conventions, that of reverence for rank, though no more natural democrat ever lived, and he makes[Pg 131] gentle fun of himself for his snobbishness: ‘I have the true English reverence for rank, and therefore liked to hear about the Princess Royal.’[314]

Nevertheless, in his letters and in his books, you get the sense that the great currents of development in Europe and in the world were not familiar to his thought. With the unfailing candor, he admits this: ‘I believe your criticism is quite just about my deficient historic spirit, for I am aware of my ignorance in this line.’[315] And an acute and sympathetic analyst of his work, points out that it suffered to some extent from the deficiency. The tendency to extend evolutionary analogies from the individual to society was partly Darwin’s fault, says this critic, because of his ‘embarking upon the discussion of social and moral matters, in “The Descent of Man”; matters concerning which he was little better informed than any other non-specialist.’[316]

In contemporary politics it was not to be expected that Darwin should have much immediate concern. One can hardly imagine a man less likely to choose an active political career, or on the whole less adapted to it, though the tact which enabled him to deal successfully with his fellow-scientists would no doubt have been helpful in more practical[Pg 132] spheres. There are occasional glimpses of his taking some part in local interests, and for a time at any rate he attended to the judicial duties which we so generally associate with the English country squire: ‘I attended the Bench on Monday, and was detained in adjudicating some troublesome cases one and one half hours longer than usual, and came home utterly knocked up, and cannot rally.’[317]

Darwin would not have been an Englishman, if he had not entertained political opinions of some sort. He could not pretend to escape the tradition so strongly planted in the blood of the race. He does indeed resent the suggestion that politics are more important than science: ‘Did you see a sneer some time ago in the Times about how incomparably more interesting politics were compared with science even to scientific men?... Jeffrey, in one of his letters, I remember, says that making an effective speech in Parliament is a far grander thing than writing the grandest history. All this seems to me a poor short-sighted view.’[318] But he has been brought up a Whig, a Liberal, and Whig prejudices are inherent in his system. This was true in the early days of the Beagle voyage: ‘The Captain does everything in his power to assist me, and we get on very well, but I thank my better fortune he has not[Pg 133] made me a renegade to Whig principles.’[319] And it remained true to old age. When answering a questionnaire in 1873, he described himself as ‘Liberal or Radical,’[320] but the radicalism was of a very conservative and English order.

The Whig partisanship even shows itself in quite normal fashion in hatred of the Tories, and on this head the tolerant and kindly scientist expresses himself with a rather amusing bitterness: ‘Thank God, the cold-hearted Tories, who, as J. Mackintosh used to say, have no enthusiasm, except against enthusiasm, have for the present run their race.’[321] But these outbursts are not to be taken very seriously.

There are occasional glimpses of interest in current public men and current public affairs. Lord Bryce gives a striking account of a visit which Gladstone paid to the great thinker. Darwin’s comment was, ‘he seemed to be quite unaware that he was a great man, and talked to us as if he had been an ordinary person like ourselves.’ On which Bryce remarks: ‘The friend who was with me and I could not but look at each other and exchange covert smiles. We were feeling toward Darwin just as he had felt toward Gladstone.’[322] During the early portion of the Franco-German War Darwin’s sympathy, like that of many Englishmen, was[Pg 134] with Germany: ‘I have not yet met a soul in England who does not rejoice in the splendid triumph of Germany over France: it is a most just retribution against that vainglorious, war-liking nation.’[323] But the struggles of party politics, as they went on about him, aroused little attention and little ardor.

There was, however, one political event of his time that called forth Darwin’s keen sympathy and extended comment, and that was the American Civil War. As is well known, English opinion was much divided on this question, and the prejudices of the upper class, at any rate among the more conservative, were in favor of the South. Although Darwin was by no means confident that the North would win, he was strongly on that side from the start, and his numerous letters to Asa Gray show how decided his feeling was.

The feeling was not based on the abstract political and constitutional considerations that appealed to Americans, but on Darwin’s rooted, bitter antipathy to the system of slavery in any form. When he was in South America with the Beagle, he had plenty of opportunity to watch the working of human servitude, and it disgusted and repelled him beyond measure. ‘To this day, if I hear a distant scream, it recalls with painful vividness my[Pg 135] feelings, when passing a house near Pernambuco, I heard the most pitiable moans, and could not but suspect that some poor slave was being tortured, yet knew that I was as powerless as a child even to remonstrate.... Near Rio de Janeiro I lived opposite to an old lady, who kept screws to crush the fingers of her female slaves. I have stayed in a house where a young household mulatto, daily and hourly, was reviled, beaten, and persecuted enough to break the spirit of the lowest animal.’[324] As a result of these experiences and many others, Darwin imbibed a detestation of slavery and slave-holders which lasted through life, and which led him to oppose them where he could, whether in England or America.

The hostility to slavery was based even more deeply on an intense hatred of cruelty, barbarity, and the infliction of physical suffering of any sort. The dislike of such suffering was so keen that from the start it incapacitated Darwin for the medical profession, which his father would have been glad to see him follow. He could not bear the sight of blood, and fled from an operation with disgust. Ill-treatment of animals was especially tormenting to him, and he interfered to prevent it, when he could: ‘He returned one day from his walk pale and[Pg 136] faint having seen a horse ill-used, and from the agitation of violently remonstrating with the man.’[325]

With such a general sensibility, Darwin’s attitude towards vivisection is extremely curious. Knowing as he did the importance of animal experiment, he could not possibly range himself on the side of the anti-vivisectionists. But he supported every effort to have humanity legally emphasized and rigidly insisted upon. The nature of his feeling in the matter appears clearly in a passage of ‘The Descent of Man’: ‘Every one has heard of the dog suffering under vivisection, who licked the hand of the operator; this man, unless the operation was fully justified by an increase of our knowledge, or unless he had a heart of stone, must have felt remorse to the last hour of his life.’[326]

In sociological questions of a broader bearing, which made no such immediate appeal to his susceptibilities, Darwin took much less interest. Now and then some special point arouses him. He was excited about any attempt to interfere with the marriage of cousins, because he had married his cousin and had in consequence largely investigated the subject.[327] He was decidedly opposed to the English tradition of primogeniture, and felt its unfairness. On the land-question he writes to Wallace:[Pg 137] ‘I see you are going to write on the most difficult political question, the land. Something ought to be done; but what, is the rub.’[328] In the same spirit of remoteness and uncertainty, he writes also to Wallace in regard to Henry George’s ‘Progress and Poverty’: ‘I will certainly order “Progress and Poverty,” for the subject is a most interesting one. But I read many years ago some books on political economy, and they produced a disastrous effect on my mind, viz., utterly to distrust my own judgment on the subject, and to doubt much every one else’s judgment. So I feel sure that Mr. George’s book will only make my mind worse confounded than it is at present.’[329] But it is clear that the remoteness did not imply contempt or cynical disregard, merely a feeling of complete inability and diffidence in regard to economic problems, and one is slow to condemn this state of mind, when one thinks that such problems are usually dealt with and solved, if it can be called so, by those in whose equipment freedom from diffidence is the most aggressive and impressive instrument.

II
With artistic and general æsthetic matters, Darwin, at any rate in later years, was even more indifferent[Pg 138] than with political. It is true that his scientific investigations sometimes involved the abstract analysis of æsthetics: ‘I agree with what you say about beauty. I formerly thought a good deal on the subject, and was led quite to repudiate the doctrine of beauty being created for beauty’s sake.’[330] The theory of sexual selection, as presented in ‘The Descent of Man,’ necessitated a good deal of discussion of the susceptibility to color and form and to music. But such æsthetic discussion has nothing whatever to do with æsthetic enjoyment.

One thing may be said in regard to Darwin; with art as with everything else, he was absolutely free from pretense. He says of one writer, ‘The pretentiousness of her style is extremely disagreeable, not to say nauseous to many persons.’[331] Anything artificial, anything affected, was peculiarly repugnant to him, and never under any circumstances would he have pretended to admire or to appreciate a work of art that really left him cold. Indeed it was partly his intense wish not to appear to feel what he did not feel that made him inclined to underestimate his artistic pleasure as compared with the raptures of those who exclaimed conventionally over what they neither understood nor enjoyed.

[Pg 139]

Nevertheless, it seems unquestionable that art in its varied forms hardly afforded Darwin the delight and solace that it brings to many persons. The theater he cared little for at any period of his life. The effort, fatigue, and constraint outweighed the charm. Mrs. Darwin, who was a lover of average plays, though she found Shakespeare tedious and said so with something of her husband’s candor, is quite anxious on the subject: ‘The real crook in my lot I have withheld from you, but I must own it to you sooner or later. It is that he has a great dislike of going to the play, so that I am afraid we shall have some domestic dissensions on that head.’[332] Later she takes him to see Macready in ‘Richelieu’ and hopes that he is getting converted, but there are no signs that the hopes were finally realized.

With the plastic arts the case is somewhat better. There is little reference to architecture. One passage in a letter seems to suggest the feeling of cathedral grandeur, but the æsthetic quickly turns into the scientific bearing: ‘Possibly the sense of sublimity excited by a grand cathedral may have some connection with the vague feelings of terror and superstition in our savage ancestors, when they entered a great cavern or gloomy forest.’[333] As regards pictures, his son thinks that he did keep up his[Pg 140] love of them to a certain extent.[334] His biographer remarks: ‘His love of pictures as a young man is almost a proof that he must have had an appreciation of a portrait as a work of art, not as a likeness.’[335] And the biographer adds, with entire justice: ‘This way of looking at himself as an ignoramus in all matters of art, was strengthened by the absence of pretence, which was part of his character.’[336] The immediate recognition of a Salvator Rosa scene in one of the Beagle experiences shows an acquaintance with painting in its different forms and periods.[337] Yet pictures make a different showing in Darwin’s letters from what they have in Edward FitzGerald’s, for instance.

The form of art which meant most to Darwin and into which he seemed to enter with the nearest approach to ecstasy was music. Here again, there is a good deal of theoretical discussion, which at times appears of a nature to dampen emotional enjoyment. But there can be no question that with Darwin as a young man the emotional enjoyment was there, and sincere, and profound, even at times overmastering. He does indeed confess that his musical ear was not fine or perfect: ‘I am so utterly destitute of an ear, that I cannot perceive a discord, or keep time and hum a tune correctly; and it[Pg 141] is a mystery how I could possibly have derived pleasure from music.’[338] But it is manifest that he did derive such pleasure, and went out of his way to seek it: ‘I also got into a musical set.... From associating with these men, and hearing them play I acquired a strong taste for music, and used very often to time my walks so as to hear on week days the anthem in King’s College Chapel.’[339]

The love was for good music, too, not by any means for what was trashy or cheap. He liked Beethoven and Händel, had the natural instinct for the high and fine, in this as in other matters. Mrs. Darwin took him to classical concerts and he responded much more heartily than to the theater. He liked to have his wife and his sisters play to him, and when he was absent with the Beagle, he wrote: ‘I hope your musical tastes continue in due force. I shall be ravenous for the pianoforte.’[340]

And the enjoyment was not merely perfunctory, but went deep, and took hold of the nerves. ‘At the end of one of the parts, which was exceedingly impressive, he turned round to me and said, with a deep sigh, “How’s your backbone?” He often spoke of coldness or shivering in his back on hearing beautiful music.’[341] The references to this thrill, this tension of nervous musical excitement, occur[Pg 142] occasionally even in Darwin’s more scientific works.

And then there is the recurring doubt, the mistrust of one’s sincerity, the desperate dread of sentimental convention in these artistic matters: ‘This gave me intense pleasure, so that my backbone would sometimes shiver. I am sure that there was no affectation or mere imitation in this taste, for I used generally to go by myself to King’s College, and I sometimes hired the chorister boys to sing in my rooms.’[342]

But, affectation or not, the musical enthusiasm vanished, and the encroaching, all-absorbing growth of the scientific preoccupation crowded it out. Indeed, any one who is susceptible to musical delight, appreciates how elusive it is, how much it depends upon favorable conditions and surroundings, and how peculiarly its delicate and subtle quality is subject to erasure by distractions of a different order. And Darwin’s comment on the disappearance of his pleasure in music is: ‘I have said that formerly pictures gave me considerable, and music very great delight.... I have also almost lost my taste for pictures or music. Music generally sets me thinking too energetically on what I have been at work on, instead of giving me pleasure.’[Pg 143][343]

With the enjoyment of beauty in literary forms, Darwin’s sense of loss was quite as keen as with music. Of the higher and finer elements of style and imagination there is little evidence that he was conscious. Such consciousness would not seem very compatible with his remark about Buckle: ‘To my taste he is the very best writer of the English language that ever lived, let the other be who he may.’[344]

In this connection it is interesting to consider Darwin’s own style, as it appears in the vast mass of his production, running probably, letters and all, to over two million words. In this mass there are occasional passages of appealing beauty or startling effectiveness, for example, the charming sentence, written in age, ‘I should very much like to see you again, but you would find a visit here very dull, for we feel very old and have no amusement, and lead a solitary life,’[345] or the much earlier passage: ‘This letter is a most untidy one, but my mind is untidy with joy.’[346]

But Darwin, in writing, would have bestowed no thought or care on such qualities as these. He had a great discovery to give to the world. His one desire was to give it accurately, lucidly, and in a form that would convince, and it was his despair that he[Pg 144] thought nature had not endowed him with the gifts for doing this. He envies the admirable literary skill of Huxley and Spencer and deplores his own inability to get his thoughts and ideas into a shape that would force mankind to read and understand them: ‘I do not believe any man in England naturally writes so vile a style as I do.’[347]

Which is a gross exaggeration and belongs to the humility so manifest in other and more important matters. It is true that there are curious lapses from mere formal correctness, as in the rather attractive misuse of ‘like,’ which occasionally occurs: ‘Few have observed like you have done.’[348] It is true, also, that Darwin had not the swift and eloquent vigor of Huxley, which has sometimes virile energy enough to make force of statement appear like truth of fact. But no one, I think, can read Darwin at all widely without getting to feel a singular charm in the absolute simplicity of his manner of expressing himself. To be sure, Huxley suggests that the very simplicity is sometimes misleading: ‘A somewhat delusive simplicity of style, which tends to disguise the complexity and difficulty of the subject.’[275] But when so many writers make simple subjects difficult, it would surely be ungracious to complain of one who makes a difficult[Pg 145] subject simple. As I have before suggested, Darwin’s perfect candor, his absolute sincerity, his intense and obvious effort to have you think with him, seem to take the place of great literary qualities and to give his prose a revealing directness which is quite lacking to some who are more highly skilled.

Especially is this the case with the correspondence, where finish and technical perfection are of less importance than the power of spontaneous spiritual contact. In maintaining this contact there are few letter-writers who can surpass Darwin, and his four solid volumes, technical and scientific as they are, have a singular and persistent appeal to those who have a taste for that kind of writing.

As to his own personal enjoyment of literature, one form of it at least continued to attract him to the very last, and that was fiction. Relief from the strain of his scientific labors was best found in stories which distracted and absorbed: ‘He was extremely fond of novels,’ says his son, ‘and I remember well the way in which he would anticipate the pleasure of having a novel read to him, as he lay down, or lighted his cigarette. He took a vivid interest both in plot and characters, and would on[Pg 146] no account know beforehand how a story finished; he considered looking at the end of a novel as a feminine vice.’[276] Darwin himself confirms this statement: ‘Novels, which are works of the imagination, though not of a very high order, have been for years a wonderful relief and pleasure to me, and I often bless all novelists. A surprising number have been read aloud to me, and I like all if moderately good, and if they do not end unhappily—against which a law ought to be passed.’[277] He enjoyed Miss Austen, he adored Scott, and cites the Laird of Redgauntlet’s facial peculiarity in the book on Expression. He did not like realism, even in the mild form practiced by George Eliot, and he wished things and people to be agreeable: ‘A novel, according to my taste, does not come into the first class, unless it contains some person whom one can thoroughly love, and if a pretty woman, all the better.’[197]

But for the higher orders of literature, the loss was indubitable, and Darwin himself makes it very emphatic. He tells us that in his youth he enjoyed poetry. Shakespeare was his favorite reading. He read Thomson and Byron, and he got much pleasure from ‘Paradise Lost’: ‘Formerly Milton’s “Paradise Lost” had been my chief[Pg 147] favorite, and in my excursions during the voyage of the Beagle, when I could take only a single volume, I always chose Milton.’[198] The solid evidence of this enjoyment is the frequent reference to poetical reading in Darwin’s books. Even in connection with strictly scientific topics he is apt to introduce some citation from the poets which not only proves his point, but shows his familiarity.

Yet in later years all this poetical interest disappeared, and Darwin bewails the disappearance deeply. Shakespeare, who had touched and stirred him, ceases to awaken any emotion, rings merely hollow and empty: ‘Now for many years I cannot endure to read a line of poetry: I have tried lately to read Shakespeare, and found it so intolerably dull that it nauseated me.’[199]

A clever writer in the Popular Science Monthly some years ago endeavored to prove that here, as in other things, Darwin’s humility much exaggerated his defects, and that his natural poetical sympathy was greater than he recognized. This writer urges Darwin’s early enjoyment and his constant, apt, and accurate quotation to establish the thesis: ‘By his unconscious confession and the evidence of his written works, his mind was leavened with poetic feeling; all through his mature[Pg 148] life he is ready with quotation when the occasion calls; and the very poignancy of his regret for the loss of poetry witnesses to his poetic endowment.’[200] But the contention though ingenious, is exaggerated. Darwin’s quick intelligence was interested in the substance of Shakespeare and Milton and other poets and prose writers. But it seems to me impossible that any one who had really felt the high stimulus of the splendor of Shakespeare’s imagination could ever have lost it to any such extent as Darwin deplores with obvious sincerity. Sainte-Beuve had as wide and varied a scientific curiosity as Darwin’s. But he said when he was well over fifty, ‘I rarely write about poetry, precisely because I have loved it so much and because I still love it more than anything else.’[201] Goethe’s old age was filled with scientific preoccupations, yet the glory of poetry was more to him than any possible science.

III
The most interesting point of all in connection with these æsthetic matters is that Darwin, for all his intimate contact with nature and all his scientific study, apparently did not feel much of the rapture and ecstasy that natural beauty affords[Pg 149] to many who have often little or no scientific knowledge. Here, more than in any other field, there is of course a riot of convention and pretense, and thousands prate of clouds and sunsets and bird-song who have no more real feeling for these things than they have for any other form of æsthetic development. Nevertheless, the ecstasy has been recorded and rendered by too many persons whose gift of expression is as impressive as their sincerity is indisputable, to be neglected or overlooked. It is worth while to examine more closely into some of the elements of this imaginative enjoyment of the natural world.

To begin with, there is the delight of simple perception, the excitement, the inexplicable thrill that goes with color and form and sound and movement, with the nodding of a blossom and the quiver of a butterfly, the

‘Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.’
And no doubt this enjoyment is frequently too subtle, too delicate, too elusive, too evanescent to be put in words, and it comes to many who could never find the words to convey it. Something of its high intensity may be suggested by Cowper’s brief and poignant phrase: ‘O! I could spend whole[Pg 150] days and moonlight nights in feeding upon a lovely prospect. My eyes drink the rivers as they flow.’[202]

The secret of the enjoyment must lie mainly in obscure processes of association, hints and suggestions of buried joy and sorrow, which go down deep into the roots of subconscious memory. But at any rate it is true that such enjoyment is bound up far more with simple scenes and home surroundings than with the remote or the picturesque or what Darwin so often refers to as the sublime. The hurrying tourist, who rushes about the world in search of some higher mountain or rougher glacier or wilder valley is not the one who feels the secret charm of nature, but rather he who strolls in lonely, quiet fields or woods that he has always known and loved. The return of violets in early spring, the song of thrushes in summer twilights, these are the things that bring tears, that come full charged with the weight of all that Cowper means when he writes of

‘Scenes that soothed
Or charmed me young, no longer young I find
Still soothing and of power to charm me still.’[203]
And it is in this matter of association that the poets most of all help us. It is they who can disentangle the subtle threads of emotion and thought[Pg 151] that have twined themselves about the simple impressions of the natural world, and who in turn can interweave a tissue of still more splendid imaginative glory with all our sight and all our hearing. It is Shakespeare with his

‘Daffodils
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty.’
it is Keats, with his

‘Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,’
or his,

‘Fast-fading violets covered up in leaves,’
who store our souls with memories that vibrate at the sight of daffodils and violets and stars.

And the imagination goes further yet, interpenetrates the whole of nature, transforms it, makes it a living, sentient unity, wholly unlike the dead multiplicity on which the scientist exercises his ingenious research. Take Emerson’s ‘Nature’ and compare it with Darwin’s book on Earthworms. The Darwin has its fascination: it makes you long to spend your days watching and testing and measuring the tiny creatures who are forever making over the surface of the globe. But the Emerson transfuses all this natural world with thought, with creative human intelligence, dissolves it, moulds[Pg 152] it, re-creates it, tosses and turns it till it seems a ball and a trifle for the overmastering soul of man to produce or abolish as it will. Or again, with Wordsworth, there is the sense of animating life in nature, the dim, impersonal personality, which is for ever passing and repassing through the endless manifestations that are all the scientist can count or measure,

‘A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts.’
And as there is the sense of this profounder life in nature, this deeper, mysterious unity, back of all the varied shift and change, so there is the passionate desire to be at one with that unity, to lose one’s miserable, insignificant, turbulent, tormenting I in that vast, illimitable, measureless All. There is the thirst of Shelley’s ‘Adonais’:

‘That sustaining love,
Which, through the web of being blindly wove
By man and beast and earth and air and sea,
Burns bright or dim, as each are mirrors of
The fire for which all thirst.’
There is Byron’s cry:

‘I live not in myself, but I become
Portion of that about me, and to me
High mountains are a feeling.’[204]
And with the realization that the longing cannot be satisfied, that we are forever imprisoned within the[Pg 153] insuperable barriers of this petty I, from which there is no escape, comes a bitter revolt of despair, or a profound melancholy of questioning. It is Obermann, with his, ‘There, in the peace of night, I questioned my uncertain destiny, and this inconceivable universe, which, containing everything yet does not contain my desires.’[205] Or, as an American contemporary has expressed the deep suggestion of the earnest stars: ‘O Lyra, I have gazed at you, until I could not tell your brightness from my own eyes. I have gazed at you till my soul left my body, and circled with you through the stars; but there is something which I am and you are not, something which will not let me rest....

‘Infinite Intelligence! Infinite Beauty! Either make me what thou art, take me to thyself, or free me from this passion which I cannot gratify and cannot destroy. Make me as other men are, toilers and forgetters, seeking yesterday in to-day, and to-day in to-morrow, and illusion always; or fulfill for me the hope which the waters whisper, which I can feel throbbing forever in the heart of thy world.’

Of all this in Darwin nothing whatever, nothing, nothing. It may indeed be said that with nature, as with other things, many people have feelings and experiences that they do not express or try to express.[Pg 154] But persons who cherish such experiences with the natural world usually have a more constant regard and interest for the expression of them in others than Darwin had. Any such melancholy or passionate longing as is suggested above one would of course not expect in him. There was no natural melancholy in his temperament. He was depressed and discouraged when things went badly, yet in the main his disposition was even and serene. But his enjoyment of natural scenes and objects, which is indisputable and proved by his own testimony and that of others, would seem to have been generally of a rather superficial character, and certainly not to have partaken of the nature of passion. How far, far different is his touch from that of Lucretius, for example.

Darwin enjoyed picturesque surroundings and novel experiences. He enjoyed the beauty of flowers, their color and shape. His son’s account of this is very charming: ‘I used to like to hear him admire the beauty of a flower; it was a kind of gratitude to the flower itself, and a personal love for its delicate form and color. I seem to remember him gently touching a flower he delighted in; it was the same simple admiration that a child might have.’[206] Occasionally, also, there are scattered[Pg 155] hints which seem to suggest a deeper feeling. There is the description of the hour in Moor Park: ‘At last I fell asleep on the grass, and awoke with a chorus of birds singing around me, and squirrels running up the trees, and some woodpeckers laughing, and it was as pleasant and rural a scene as ever I saw, and I did not care one penny how any of the beasts or birds had been formed.’[207] Yet even here, ‘as pleasant and rural a scene as ever I saw,’ is the eighteenth century, not the nineteenth. There is the still intenser bit in the ‘Beagle’: ‘Neither plant nor bird, excepting a few condors wheeling around the higher pinnacles, distracted my attention from the inanimate mass. I felt glad that I was alone: it was like watching a thunderstorm, or hearing in full orchestra a chorus of the Messiah.’[208] And there is the striking touch in the early letter to Henslow: ‘The delight of sitting on a decaying trunk amidst the quiet gloom of the forest is unspeakable, and never to be forgotten,’[209] which at least suggests Obermann in the Forest of Fontainebleau.

But these rare and scattered intimations serve only to bring out the different nature of the habitual attitude, and it is clear enough that such æsthetic element as there was gradually faded in the[Pg 156] growing absorption of the scientific ardor. It cannot be denied that in the main Darwin’s interest in nature was intellectual, not emotional.

IV
As with sociology and with æsthetic experience, so, and even more, with God and the things of God, Darwin’s limitations are profoundly interesting, and if the loss was less, because there was less to lose, it was nevertheless, in all its aspects significant. Here again, as with æsthetic emotion, it must be remembered that men do not utter all they feel, and those who feel most sometimes utter least. But it so happens that circumstances obliged Darwin to be very explicit about his religious views and experiences, so that we are justified in assuming that we have access to pretty much all there was.

It must never be forgotten that Darwin grew up in the thoroughly conventional atmosphere of the English Church. Neither his father nor his grandfather was an active believer, but the immense tradition of staid decorum, from which the English upper middle class rarely escapes, was all about his boyhood, and left an indelible mark on it. To appreciate how haunting and oppressive the atmosphere[Pg 157] was, one should read ‘A Century of Family Letters,’ edited by Darwin’s daughter. The flavor of established religious propriety is so overwhelming that one wonders how Darwin could ever have shaken himself intellectually free from it.

Mrs. Darwin was a wise and a charming woman, and she was invaluable to her husband, but, oh, she was English. She took a proper wifely interest in Darwin’s scientific adventures, and was sometimes of assistance to him. She had her anxieties about the animosity of his critics and also about the drift of his speculations, and her daughter implies that in later years these speculations effected a change in the mother’s religious beliefs.[210] But I relish very much this lovely passage of solicitude for the husband’s eternal welfare, written in the year of the publication of the ‘Origin’: ‘I am sure you know I love you well enough to believe that I mind your sufferings, nearly as much as I should my own, and I find the only relief to my own mind is to take it as from God’s hand, and to try to believe that all suffering and illness is meant to help us to exalt our minds and to look forward with hope to a future state. When I see your patience, deep compassion for others, self-command, and above all gratitude for the smallest thing done to help you, I cannot[Pg 158] help longing that these precious feelings should be offered to Heaven for the sake of your daily happiness.’[211] Also, Mrs. Darwin was a careful observer of that augustly hideous institution, the Victorian Sunday: ‘I remember she persuaded me,’ writes a reminiscent relative, ‘to refuse any invitation from the neighbors that involved using the carriage on that day, and it was a question in her own mind whether she might rightly embroider, knit, or play patience.’[212] It strikes me as peculiarly delightful that the Sabbath should be treated with such reverence in the house of one who was to do more than any one else to smash the God of the Sabbath altogether.

So it is evident that Darwin grew up with a strong religious habit. There was even serious talk of his entering the church, till his hopeless lack of vocation made it clearly impossible. The net of religious inheritance and circumstance was woven closely about him and in the early days he recognized himself as in general orthodox enough. I like particularly the reply he made to his Catholic friends in South America, who conjured him to see the light: ‘Why do you not become a Christian—for our religion is certain?’ ‘I assured them I was a sort of Christian.’[213] A sort of Christian! Isn’t that charmingly characteristic? You can imagine[Pg 159] millions of fanatics to-day howling, ‘What sort of Christian?’

One thing at least is certain: Darwin never was cynical or mocking in his attitude toward religion. Without the least trace of affectation or cant, he always spoke of the church and the clergy and religious practice with respect, and with the same gentle tolerance that he displayed towards those who differed from him in any line. Peculiarly significant in this regard are his references to the missionaries with whom he came into contact on his southern voyage. He was at first disposed to speak of them without enthusiasm, to say the least, and Admiral Sullivan, who was with him on the Beagle, tells of his scepticism about missionary work, ‘his conviction that it was utterly useless to send missionaries to such a set of savages as the Fuegians.’[214] Many years later Darwin was entirely converted, and, as usual, did not hesitate to say so: ‘He wrote me that he had been wrong and I right in our estimates of the native character, and the possibility of doing them good through missionaries; and he requested me to forward to the Society an enclosed cheque for £5, as a testimony of the interest he took in their good work.’[215] Other passages could be adduced to the same effect.

[Pg 160]

And the religious training and the constant presence of high-minded and earnest living and meaning people about him had established in Darwin a secure habit of morals and a vivid activity of conscience. He might subject the moral habit in theory to cold analysis, ‘The moral nature of man has reached its present standard, partly through the advancement of his reasoning powers and consequently of a just public opinion, but especially from his sympathies having been rendered more tender and widely diffused through the effects of habit, example, instruction, and reflection.’[216] But the analysis did not in the least affect his own personal instinct of right and upright living.

It is not only that there is no appearance or record of irregularity of conduct of any kind. But, much more than this, there is repeated evidence of the nicest scrupulousness and a tender conscience which would not be surpassed in the most devout and anxious Christian. It was perhaps ‘a sort of Christian,’ but assuredly not a bad sort, who, as I have before mentioned, got up in the middle of the night to correct a fancied misstatement, not about a scientific fact, but about an æsthetic experience.[298] And a clerical friend records a similar incident, equally striking: ‘On one occasion, when a parish[Pg 161] meeting had been held on some disputed point of no great importance, I was surprised by a visit from Mr. Darwin at night. He came to say that, thinking over the debate, though what he had said was quite accurate, he thought I might have drawn an erroneous conclusion, and he would not sleep till he had explained it.’[299] With the members of his own family there was the same scrupulous, tender anxiety not to do or say anything unjust or unkind. After some quite warrantable and reasonable outburst of indignation over the levity of one of his sons, ‘The next morning at seven o’clock he came to my bedroom and said how sorry he was that he had been so angry and that he had not been able to sleep; and with a few kind words he left me.’[300] This ‘sort of Christian’ is perhaps not even yet so common as might be wished.

On the other hand, when we come to the more intimate, personal aspects of the religious life, Darwin’s record appears to be largely negative, and what earlier traces there are gradually disappear. Take prayer. Here again, in the study of Expression, we have the scientific analysis, of prayer as an attitude at any rate: ‘Hence it is not probable that either the uplifting of the eyes or the joining of the open hands under the influence of devotional[Pg 162] feelings, are innate or truly expressive actions, and this could hardly have been expected, for it is very doubtful whether feelings, such as we should rank as devotional, affected the hearts of men, whilst they remained during past ages in an uncivilized condition.’[301] Also, there are other occasional references to the external aspects of religious petition, as in the Beagle Journal: ‘He prayed as a Christian should do, with fitting reverence, and without the fear of ridicule or any ostentation of piety.’[302]

But to prayer as a personal experience I find only one single allusion. When Darwin was a boy, he was a good runner, often took part in races, and was often successful. His explanation of his success at that time is interesting: ‘When in doubt I prayed earnestly to God to help me, and I well remember that I attributed my success to my prayers and not to my quick running, and marveled how generally I was aided.’[303] This recalls the youthful experience of Moody, who was caught under a fence rail and could not move, but put up earnest prayers to God, and then was able to lift the rail quite easily.

Prayer played a very different part in Moody’s later life from what it did in Darwin’s, so far as any[Pg 163] tangible evidence goes. It is true that probably a good many men pray whom one would never suspect of doing so. I had an old friend, who had been brought up devoutly but had been a Unitarian for years, rarely going to church, apparently indifferent to religion, and discussing speculative, ultimate problems with annihilating freedom. Yet he told me, in an outburst of confidence, that every night, when he went to bed, he repeated, in substance, if not in words, the prayers that he had learned at his mother’s knee. ‘I don’t know what it means,’ he said; ‘I don’t know whether there is a God, or whether He hears me, or what I want of Him; but I pray.’ And I, who had not prayed for thirty years, heard him with amazement. Nevertheless, I do not believe that Darwin repeated ‘Now I lay me’ to the end, or prayed for triumph with evolution as he had prayed for triumph in the foot-race.

The question of a future life seems to have had as little actuality for Darwin as that of prayer, and we have more explicit evidence on the point, because correspondents were always writing for a statement of his beliefs. He never committed himself to any complete assertion of disbelief. On the contrary, he is quite ready to admit some forcible positive arguments: ‘Believing as I do that man[Pg 164] in the distant future will be a far more perfect creature than he now is, it is an intolerable thought that he and all other sentient beings are doomed to complete annihilation after such long-continued slow progress. To those who fully admit the immortality of the human soul, the destruction of our world will not appear so dreadful.’[304] Yet the difficulties seem insuperable, and he is hardly able to accept any definite belief: ‘Many persons seem to make themselves quite easy about immortality ... by intuition; and I suppose I must differ from such persons because I do not feel any innate conviction upon such points.’[305]

The supreme test as to the future is the death of those we love and the thought of our own death. In 1851 Darwin lost a little daughter whom he loved tenderly. His intimate letters at that time have affectionate and pathetic references to her; but there is not one word in them to indicate the slightest hope of ever meeting her again. When he himself was close to the end, mentally clear but with no prospect of recovery, his calm words were: ‘I am not the least afraid of death.’[306]

As to the question of God, Darwin’s statements are as elaborate as in regard to immortality, and for the same reason, because eager inquirers were[Pg 165] determined to find out where he stood. In early life, while he still believed in the theory of special creations, he accepted the deistic view without hesitation: ‘Many years ago, when I was collecting facts for the “Origin,” my belief in what is called a personal God was as firm as that of Dr. Pusey himself.’[307] As the years went on, the working out of his theories involved a profound change, but still he never at any time admitted an absolute disbelief or a militant atheism. He goes over and over the old, old arguments. How could an omnipotent God, who desired the good of all his creatures, inflict upon the travailing creation such an infinity of misery? Again, there is the puzzle of design and providential interference. He is reluctant to believe that this vast and ordered whole came together by mere chance; yet he debates with Asa Gray the possible providence in the fall of a sparrow: ‘An innocent and good man stands under a tree and is killed by a flash of lightning. Do you believe (and I really should like to hear) that God designedly killed this man? Many or most persons do believe this; I can’t and don’t. If you believe so, do you believe that when a swallow snaps up a gnat that God designed that that particular swallow should snap up that particular gnat at that[Pg 166] particular instant? I believe that the man and the gnat are in the same predicament.’[308] Nor does the Pantheistic solution appeal much more than the anthropomorphic one. Darwin is constantly personifying Nature, with a capital N; but he is careful to specify that he does this for convenience, and that Nature means only the sum of natural laws in their eternal working, not any mysterious force of Divinity. The Pantheistic solution also creates as many puzzles as it solves. So the conclusion is, to leave all such questions as hopeless and insoluble, beyond the intelligence of man so completely that it does not seem intended that he should grapple with them. And Darwin at least was satisfied to weigh and measure and experiment and let God go.

It does not appear that he felt the need and the longing and the desire that torture some of us. Like some other men, perhaps like many others, the life of this world, the work of this world, the pleasure of this world, the interest of this world, were enough for him, and the other world might simply wait its turn. And as in beginning this chapter I compared the evangelist Moody with the scientist Darwin in their extreme limitation of interests, so at the end I would compare them again to bring out the enormous difference. To Darwin the mere[Pg 167] fact of life in the universe and the endless curiosity about it were enough. Whether God was there or not was a matter that could not be settled and need not be discussed. To Moody both life and the universe were nothing without God.

[Pg 168]

CHAPTER V
DARWIN: THE LOVER
I
If Darwin was not conspicuous as a lover of God, he was at least notable in every way as one who loved his fellow men. He liked to meet people, liked to talk with them, liked to have them about him. He was interested in humanity, enjoyed the contact of it, and felt in others the warm throb of a heart that beat as kindly and sympathetically as his own. Men, women, and children were drawn to him and recognized a friend.

Of his personal appearance the chief impression that comes to us is naturally in age. He was tall and powerfully built, and in his youth must have been attractive to look at, though there is no definite record of this. In later years his aspect was dignified without being severe. ‘His face is massive,’ writes Norton to Ruskin, with ‘little beauty of feature, but much of expression.’[235] What seems to have chiefly impressed observers was the eyes and the look in them. Professor Osborn says: ‘The impression of Darwin’s bluish-gray eyes, deep-set under overhanging brows, was that they were the[Pg 169] eyes of a man who could survey all nature.’[236] And Bryce agrees: ‘The feature which struck one most was the projecting brow with its bushy eyebrows, and deep beneath it the large gray-blue eyes with their clear and steady look. It was an alert look, as of one accustomed to observing keenly, yet it was also calm and reflective. There was a pleasant smile which came and passed readily, but the chief impression made by the face was that of tranquil, patient thoughtfulness, as of one whose mind had long been accustomed to fix itself upon serious problems.’[237]

There is general testimony as to Darwin’s ready hospitality and eager kindliness in greeting all those who came into his household. There was no reserve or assumption of dignity, but a perfectly natural and cordial desire and disposition to make every one feel at home. I do not know any more impressive witness to this charm of manner than Leslie Stephen, who was certainly not a man to be unduly carried away. Stephen speaks of ‘the charm which no one to whom I have ever spoken failed to perceive in his presence and in his writings.’[238] And he elsewhere dwells upon it more elaborately: ‘He was in town for a few days and most kindly called upon me. You may believe that I was[Pg 170] proud to welcome him, for of all eminent men that I have ever seen he is beyond comparison the most attractive to me. There is something almost pathetic in his simplicity and friendliness. I heard a story the other day about a young German admirer whom Lubbock took to see him. He could not summon up courage to speak to the great man; but, when they came away, burst into tears. That is not my way; but I sympathize to some extent with the enthusiastic Dutchman.’[239]

The accounts of Darwin’s conversation are as attractive as of his appearance and manner. That he entered into it usually with intense eagerness appears from his own account of his fatigue from it: ‘I find that on my good days, when I can write for a couple of hours, that anything which stirs me up like talking for half or even a quarter of an hour, generally quite prostrates me, sometimes even for a long time afterwards.’[240] But it is very evident that he did not engross the talk and even after his high position was established had not the slightest tendency to hold forth or deliver orations, as is the habit of some distinguished men. Norton even declares that ‘His talk is not often memorable on account of brilliancy or impressive sayings—but it is always the expression of the qualities of mind[Pg 171] and heart which combine in such rare excellence in his genius.’[241]

Instead of himself talking to excess, he liked to draw his visitors out, to get at their interests and their point of view, not in any intrusive fashion, but with instinctive sympathy, and with his natural modest sense that their affairs were more important than his own. He clearly had in a high degree the exquisite art of listening intelligently, and of asking questions which would bring out all that was best and most profitable in the person with whom he happened to be talking. This well appears in Charles Kingsley’s account of his first interview with him: ‘I was deeply moved at meeting for the first time Darwin. I trembled before him like a boy, and longed to tell him all I felt for him, but dare not, lest he should think me a flatterer extravagant. But the modesty and simplicity of his genius was charming. Instead of teaching, he only wanted to learn, instead of talking, to listen, till I found him asking me to write papers which he could as yet hardly write himself—ignorant in his grand simplicity of my ignorance and of his own wisdom.’[242]

The conversation was not by any means always serious. It does not appear that Darwin had any great enjoyment of humorous literature. Nor was[Pg 172] he inclined to witty flings or brilliant repartee. His mind worked too slowly for a rapid-fire exchange of this sort. It was only occasionally that he hit out at a promising interlocutor, as when he remarked to Lady Derby, who had been describing her remarkable peculiarities of vision, ‘Ah, Lady Derby, how I should like to dissect you.’[243] Above all, he had no taste for the satirical or bitter, and it was only under extreme provocation that he could write to Huxley: ‘God bless you!—get well, be idle, and always reverence a bishop.’[244]

But he was full of genial, kindly fun, and was ready to see the laughable side of little incidents and even great. He laughed heartily and frequently and with an infectious gayety and buoyancy. He liked merry and humorous talk, with plenty of anecdote and sparkle, and he was ready to chaff and joke his friends and to take the same sort of thing himself. He was even willing to find a comic side in the sacred subject of natural selection and to turn his own deepest interests into matter for smiles when the occasion was suitable. Thus he writes to Lubbock, of his son: ‘See what it is to be well trained. Horace said to me yesterday, “If every one would kill adders they would come to sting less.” I answered, “Of course they would,[Pg 173] for there would be fewer.” He replied indignantly: “I did not mean that; but the timid adders which run away would be saved, and in time they would never sting at all.” Natural selection of cowards!’[245]

In Darwin’s later years he might of course have been crowded with social engagements all the time. Everybody wanted to see him, to know him, to talk with him, to entertain him. The preoccupation of his work and the limitations of his health made any such social activity impossible, and it is not likely that he greatly missed it. Yet, wherever he went, he was welcome, his society was appreciated, not only for his reputation, but for itself, and when he could get about, it evidently gave him pleasure: ‘I dined with Bell at the Linnean Club, and liked my dinner ... dining out is such a novelty to me that I enjoyed it.’[246] At an earlier period, when there was more strength to spare for such diversions, he entered into them with hearty enthusiasm, and even, it appears, with a thorough rollicking zest. When he settled himself in Cambridge, after his return from the Beagle voyage, he complained that the only trouble was that life was too pleasant and some agreeable party every evening made morning labor rather difficult.[247] And of the miscellaneous social gatherings of still earlier days he[Pg 174] writes: ‘We used often to dine together in the evening, though these dinners often included men of a higher stamp, and we sometimes drank too much, with jolly singing and playing at cards afterwards. I know that I ought to feel ashamed of days and evenings thus spent, but as some of my friends were very pleasant, and we were all in the highest spirits, I cannot help looking back to these times with much pleasure.’[248]

In the matter of sports and diversions Darwin’s tastes seem to have run rather to those which are not in their nature social, though what attracted him was the character of the sports themselves, and not the element of solitude. In his youth he was passionately fond of outdoor sport, of fishing and hunting. He had a keen love for angling, he says, and would sit for hours watching his float in some solitary pool or stream, though when some one told him that he could kill the angle worms with salt and water instead of spitting them on the hook, it was a great relief to his feelings.[249] He was especially eager with a gun, and long before he took the slightest interest in the scientific study of birds, he liked to kill them. He tells us that the killing of his first snipe excited him so much that he trembled till it was difficult to reload his gun.[Pg 175] Even after his scientific interest had begun to develop, he dropped every vestige of it in the shooting season: ‘at that time I should have thought myself mad to give up the first days of partridge-shooting for geology or any other science.’[250]

He became an excellent shot and, as his son says, had all his life a remarkable power of coördinating his movements, so that he was not only accurate with a gun, but in throwing, and after he was a grown man, simply to test his skill, he threw a marble at a cross-beak and killed it: ‘He was so unhappy at having uselessly killed the cross-beak that he did not mention it for years, and then explained that he should never have thrown at it if he had not felt sure that his old skill had gone from him.’[251] Perhaps the most striking witness to the depth of Darwin’s passion for these field sports is the unusually harsh remark of his father who loved his son and was deeply beloved by him: ‘You care for nothing but shooting, dogs, and rat-catching, and will be a disgrace to yourself and all your family.’[252] Which is not the first case of imperfect prevision on the part of a father, nor the last.

Of games that are more essentially social, there is no indication that Darwin was an ardent practitioner. When he was at school he played ‘batfives,’[Pg 176][253] but there is no mention of football or cricket. In describing his personal tastes in later years, he speaks of cards with something of contempt: ‘Have not played for many years, but I am sure I should not remember.’[254] His tone about them in 1842, however, is quite different: ‘This walk was rather too much for me, and I was dull till whist, which I enjoyed beyond measure.’[255] In 1859, the year of the ‘Origin,’ he set up a billiard-table, ‘and I find it does me a deal of good, and drives the horrid species out of my head.’[256] But his special pleasure in the game line was backgammon, which he played with Mrs. Darwin, year after year, keeping a score of victories and defeats, getting or pretending to be, greatly excited over his failures and even indignant at his antagonist’s good-fortune. In 1875 he wrote to Asa Gray: ‘Pray give our very kind remembrances to Mrs. Gray. I know that she likes to hear men boasting, it refreshes them so much. Now the tally with my wife in backgammon stands thus: she, poor creature, has won only 2490 games, whilst I have won, hurrah, hurrah, 2795 games.’[257]

But through it all Darwin’s humanity is evident everywhere. He loved his fellow-creatures, loved to mix with them, and to have them care for him, and[Pg 177] his interest went far deeper than a mere, though absorbing, curiosity as to their animal origin.

II
The drawback to Darwin’s social life, as to his power of work, was in the limitations of health, and if we would fully appreciate not only the heroism of his achievement, but the charm of his character, we must understand how great and far-reaching those limitations were. The natural strength and vigor of his sturdily constructed frame endured through youth and in the main through the Beagle voyage, in spite of the persistent sea-sickness; but from shortly after his return to England on, his life was nothing but a more or less relieved and varying chronic invalidism.

The effect of this upon his scientific labors I have indicated earlier. It hampered them at every step. He could work but a few hours in the morning and after that the constant effort and lesson was in the endeavor to forget; ‘It is so weariful, killing the whole afternoon, after 12 o’clock, doing nothing whatever.’[258] A piece of investigation, which required perhaps the most nice and constant watchfulness, had to be abandoned in the middle, because recurring and increasing symptoms absolutely[Pg 178] demanded that complete rest should be taken. It was necessary not only to stop working, but to stop thinking, and for a brain eager and absorbed as Darwin’s was, this was enormously difficult.

With social life the limitation was equally vexatious. It is true that there are certain compensations about such a state of things. A successful and prominent man who has his health is expected to meet all sorts of social demands and strains which consume his time to little purpose, and if he is not extremely careful of himself and does not sometimes push insistence even to the point of rudeness, he finds his work interfered with almost as much as by ill-health, or it may be even more. There are many times when delicate health is a convenient and useful excuse, and Darwin recognized this very fully: ‘Even ill-health, though it has annihilated several years of my life, has saved me from the distractions of society and amusement.’[259]

But the compensation was not always appreciated. When indigestion preserved you from boredom, you might be grateful; but when it cut you off from seeing your best friends, when it deprived you of that exchange of scientific ideas which is the keenest and most fruitful stimulus for achievement,[Pg 179] then you could not but repine a little. The excitement, the enthusiasm of eager talk, made you forget yourself and your symptoms for the time. But there was the inevitable afterwards, and gradually you learned that restraint was necessary. ‘Even talking of an evening for less than two hours has twice recently brought on such violent vomiting and trembling that I dread coming up to London.’[260] Simple comments like this, often repeated, show how intense and how crippling the weakness was.

What is notable about this matter of Darwin’s ill-health is that it bred no bitterness. There is an occasional sigh of regret, a touch of humorous complaint over the deprivations and the inability to accomplish all that was desired: ‘Adios, my dear Hooker; do be wise and good, and be careful of your stomach, within which, as I know full well, lie intellect, conscience, temper, and the affections.’[261] But there is not one trace of that sour pessimism, that crabbed outcry against the dispositions of Providence and of the universe which chronic invalidism is so apt to produce.

When we come to look for the cause of Darwin’s troubles, it is evident that at this distance of time we can hardly get a clear enough account of the[Pg 180] symptoms and the conditions to conjecture with great definiteness, though the enlarged medical knowledge of to-day might interpret matters that were then obscure. There was sometimes a disposition to attribute the whole recurring misery of later years to the Beagle sea-sickness. But Darwin himself rejected this explanation and his son points out that the settled illness came on only gradually some years after his return.[262] Darwin believed that his bad health was due ‘to the hereditary fault which came out as gout in some of the past generations.’[263] The specialists of that day were quite at sea. ‘Dr. Brinton has been here,’ says Darwin; ‘he does not believe my brain or heart primarily affected, but I have been so steadily going down hill, I cannot help doubting whether I can ever crawl a little uphill again.’[264] It is amusing to see how later speculators have exercised their wits upon the case. Dr. George M. Gould, in his brilliant ‘Biographic Clinics,’ grouped Darwin with Huxley, Tennyson, Browning, and a dozen others, as a victim of eye-strain, and believed all his trouble could have been disposed of by properly refracting glasses. With the development of glandular theories, Darwin’s thyroid, pituitary, and adrenal secretions have been set down as[Pg 181] excessive or deficient. With his build, he would certainly have been a promising subject for the experiments of the orthopædist, while the dietitian would have prescribed unlimited spinach and carrots, the osteopath would have discovered disastrous subluxations in the spine, and the psycho-analyst would see the foundation of the whole trouble in disordered complexes. And all of them would have some symptomatic justification, and all of them would have been eager to work over the poor man, as they have done over many another such, with mountains of expectation and promise and outlay, and too often a pitiful mouse of result.

Fortunately, or unfortunately, the specialist was not quite so rampant in Darwin’s day, and while later scientific developments might, or might not, have cured him, he escaped a good deal of unprofitable discomfort. The water cure was fashionable at that time and he was duly put through it, with some annoyance, and perhaps with a little improvement: ‘One most singular effect of the treatment is that it induces in most people, and eminently in my case, the most complete stagnation of mind. I have ceased to think even of barnacles.’[265]

But pending the discovery of some miraculous cure, the only help seemed to be in persistent care,[Pg 182] self-control, and discipline. It was necessary to be careful as to eating, and here Darwin appears to have been generally abstemious, though he had a taste for sweets, which he sometimes indulged with humorous excuses and a clear prevision of the bad results that were likely to follow, and did. As to alcohol, even in his earlier years when boisterous excess in drinking was common enough, Darwin was not much inclined to anything of the sort. He does indeed tell of gay supper-parties, where too much wine was drunk. His son records his confession, in answer to a query as to early habits, that ‘he was ashamed to say he had once drunk too much at Cambridge.’[266] And Grant Duff mentions a curious remark, which seems well vouched for but is hard to believe: ‘Hooker, who is staying here, amused us by saying that Darwin had told him that he had got drunk three times in early life, and thought intoxication the greatest of all pleasures.’[267] Whether he thought so or not, he did not often indulge in it. And as he grew older, he abandoned wine almost entirely, so that when she was engaged his future wife could write: ‘I don’t think it of as much consequence as she does that Charles drinks no wine, but I think it a pleasant thing.’[268] He smoked cigarettes more or less, and found them[Pg 183] restful, but he certainly did not overdo the habit. His favorite indulgence was snuff-taking, which was given up and renewed much after the fashion of Lamb’s tobacco. Of his efforts in this direction he writes, with humor: ‘I am personally in a state of utmost confusion also, for my cruel wife has persuaded me to leave off snuff for a month; and I am most lethargic, stupid, and melancholy in consequence.’[269]

The chief element in Darwin’s care of his health, however, was persistent rest. All his days were systematically planned, the few hours that could be given to it set apart for work, and the rest devoted to some form of relaxation or needed repose. There were long nights, if not for sleep, at least for physical tranquillity, and there were afternoons and evenings spent largely on the sofa, in chat or in listening to music or to stories of purely diverting quality. Any interruption of this carefully arranged schedule was avoided, if possible, and almost always had to be paid for. Thus, by persistent, systematic, rigid self-control, and by sacrificing days and months and years to a comparatively tedious indolence, Darwin gained the few hours that were essential for the work that shook the world.

[Pg 184]

In one respect he was extremely fortunate. If he was hampered by ill-health, he at least had ample means to make that ill-health as tolerable as possible. He did not know the misery of having to support yourself and your family and being physically unable to do it. Without wholly endorsing the sarcastic remark of Butler, ‘The worst thing that can happen to a man is to lose his money, the next his health, and the third his reputation,’ one can see some truth in it, especially when the possession of money serves to make the loss of health more endurable. Darwin’s father was very successful financially. He provided for all his children in the most liberal fashion during his life, and left them in comfortable circumstances after his death, and Darwin often refers to this with gratitude and appreciation. The son seems to have had abundant means to keep up a considerable establishment, to educate and provide for his own large family, to indulge in general benefaction, and to do if not all he wished, at least a great deal in the way of scientific investigation and experiment.

In later years a considerable income from the published books was naturally added to the supply that was inherited. Darwin was proud of his earning in this way, and he had reason to be, although[Pg 185] he could hardly boast of such returns as were received by his contemporary Trollope. One is chiefly impressed, however, with his extreme anxiety that others should be treated fairly, and that no one should suffer by his gains. Thus he writes to his publisher, in a tone which publishers will I think recognize as not usual: ‘You are really too generous about the, to me, scandalously heavy corrections. Are you acting fairly towards yourself? Would it not be better at least to share the £72 8s? I shall be fully satisfied, for I had no business to send, though quite unintentionally and unexpectedly, such badly composed MS to the printers.’[270]

One of the consequences of Darwin’s delicate health was, that he was more or less anxious about money. When you can count on your physical strength for fighting circumstance, you can float cheerfully out into the world and let your daily support come where you can get it. But if you are weak, crippled, and hampered, if you are absolutely dependent upon the comforts which others merely enjoy but can do without, you look with dread upon the possibility of losing what alone assures you of the indispensable. Darwin was not altogether free from this feeling, and his son tells[Pg 186] us that he was haunted by the fear that his children would not have health to earn their own living yet might be obliged to do so.[271] In consequence he was always thoughtful and careful in money matters. He looked after his investments with shrewd intelligence, and respected the faculty of making money and keeping it. He was not above saving a penny where it could be done, and especially he was exact and systematic about his expenditure. His biographer says that ‘he kept accounts with great care, classifying them, and balancing at the end of the year like a merchant. I remember the quick way in which he would reach out for his account book to enter each check paid, as though he were in a hurry to get it entered before he had forgotten it.’[272] An interesting contradiction to this financial exactitude and to Darwin’s ordinary habits of accuracy is his inveterate carelessness in not dating or not fully dating his letters.

The financial exactitude and anxiety do not for a moment imply that he was not liberal and generous in the highest degree, as perhaps the wisest, and even the largest generosity, comes with such prevision and forethought. He spent freely on his current living, and he was particularly considerate, not only in giving to his family, but in the[Pg 187] manner of giving, which sometimes seems to count for even more. His son speaks of his thoughtful kindness in attending to financial arrangements, and emphasizes his generosity in paying college debts, ‘making it almost seem a virtue in me to have told him of them.’[273] Nor was the generosity confined to his family. It was broad and luminous in its working, and there are constant references to the causes to which Darwin sent his check, with no ostentation, but with the earnest desire to do good. His limitations of strength made it difficult for him to go about largely in his home neighborhood, but the poor people knew him and loved him, and he was ready and glad to assist them when possible. As Bryce says, ‘he was a kind and helpful neighbor to the humble folk who lived round him at Down.’[274] Especially he was glad to give not only his time and his limited strength, but his money, to aiding those who were doing scientific work of any sort. And in brief, in this connection of general kindliness it is worth while to note the remark of the devout old woman who was told that Darwin would go to hell for his wicked doctrines and answered: ‘God Almighty can’t afford to do without so good a man.’[Pg 188][194]

III
It was a natural consequence of invalidism that Darwin’s social habits and inclinations were conspicuous in the domestic circle. He seems to have been kindly and considerate with every one in the household, and the servants liked him, though they were sometimes puzzled by his pursuits, as when a gardener remarked that he thought Mr. Darwin would be better if he had more to do. It was very rare that he got out of temper with those who worked for him, and he dreaded having to scold any one because he knew that he was liable to say more than he meant.[195] His son tells us, ‘when I overheard a servant being scolded, and my father speaking angrily, it impressed me as an appalling circumstance.’[196] In general his manner was courteous and conciliatory and he appeared more as if he were asking a favor than giving an order. When he was overcome by illness, in the very last days, he refused to allow a neighbor’s butler either to call a cab or to accompany him home, as he was unwilling to give so much trouble.

Darwin’s extreme love for all domestic animals I have already indicated negatively in dealing with his dislike of cruelty and ill-treatment, but the love was always positive and showed itself in constant[Pg 189] interest and attention and care. One instance of much regretted sin in this regard is amusingly recorded in the Autobiographical Sketch: ‘Once as a very little boy whilst at the day school, or before that time, I acted cruelly, for I beat a puppy, I believe, simply from enjoying the sense of power; but the beating could not have been severe, for the puppy did not howl, of which I feel sure, as the spot was near the house. This act lay heavily on my conscience, as is shown by my remembering the exact spot where the crime was committed.’[107] But the crime was not repeated in later life. Even to the pigeons, which he raised for purposes of scientific investigation Darwin became greatly attached: ‘I love them to that extent,’ he says, ‘that I cannot bear to kill and skeletonize them.’[108] His dogs were matter of interest and delight and intense affection to him always. And dogs of all kinds seemed to be drawn to him. As a young man his sister’s pets would follow him instead of her, and with the dog of a friend at Cambridge it was the same. Dogs were not only the subject of his minute observations for the study of expression, they were his companions in his daily walks and his intimate friends.

For all the members of his family Darwin’s[Pg 190] affection was deep, solid, and lasting. The tenderness with which he regarded his father’s memory is, it seems to me, somewhat unusual: ‘I do not think any one could love a father much more than I did mine, and I do not believe three or four days ever pass without my still thinking of him.’[109] The tenderness shows especially in the long sketch of his father’s character, which is far less qualified with critical comments than one would expect from Darwin’s naturally analytical disposition, and always where his affection was concerned the analysis seemed to drop somewhat into abeyance. His references to his brothers and sisters also show in simple earnestness how much they meant in his life.


EMMA DARWIN AT THIRTY-ONE

Naturally the most prominent figure in the domestic circle is Mrs. Darwin, and the depth and endurance of Darwin’s affection for her are everywhere evident. There is no record or intimation of any earlier attachment or love-affair. Very likely there were such, but neither Darwin nor his biographers give any hint of them. We have seen that he liked pretty women in novels, and occasionally in his books he makes some reference to feminine attraction. His daughter tells us that ‘He was often in love with the heroines of the many novels [Pg 191]that were read to him, and used always to maintain both in books and real life that a touch of affectation was necessary to complete the charm of a pretty woman.’[110] The daughter finds it difficult to understand what this means, as her father had such a horror of affectation in general. It seems to me at any rate to mean that he did not take love-making very seriously, and there is certainly no sign that it ever much disturbed his life.

Even when he was engaged, his love for Emma Wedgwood does not seem to have been of the kind that stings and burns. His letters to her that have been printed are gentle, considerate, and sympathetic: they exhibit none of the torments that self-doubting and self-spurring and ardently exultant passion are inclined to. In the most attractive of them he writes: ‘Excuse this much egotism—I give it you because I think you will humanize me, and soon teach me there is greater happiness than building theories and accumulating facts in silence and solitude. My own dearest Emma, I earnestly pray, you may never regret the great, and I will add very good deed, you are to perform on the Tuesday.’[111] And he adds playfully: ‘I want practice in ill-treating the female sex—I did not observe Lyell had any compunction; I hope to harden my[Pg 192] conscience in time: few husbands seem to find it difficult to effect this.’[112] Everything is right and as it should be. But the tone is not that of some love-letters I have seen, and this is the more notable, considering the extraordinary frankness and directness of Darwin’s correspondence generally.

But if Darwin’s conjugal attachment did not begin with violence and high-wrought passion, it continued and deepened and strengthened with broad sunny richness to the end of his life. And this was just as true, although Mrs. Darwin had no particular affection for his scientific pursuits. I have said elsewhere that she assisted him, and in his work as in everything else she was eager to do her wifely duty and help where she could. But she had no love for the work in itself, and her daughter remarks that though in the beginning she had resolved to enter into her husband’s tastes, she found it impossible. ‘He used to tell how during some lecture at the British Association he said to her, “I am afraid this is very wearisome to you,” to which she quietly answered, “Not more than all the rest,”’[113] And in writing to Lubbock he makes gentle fun of her indifference: ‘Of course you will publish an account of [your discovery]. You will then say whether the insect can fly well through[Pg 193] the air. My wife asked, “How did he find that it stayed four hours under water without breathing?” I answered at once: “Mrs. Lubbock sat four hours watching.” I wonder whether I am right.’[114]

But Darwin did not demand that the woman he loved should share all his professional ardor. He loved her for other things, which he found in her sufficingly and inexhaustibly, for her patience, her thoughtfulness, her quick and vivacious sympathy and understanding, and the general charm of her character. In a passage of his Autobiography not published till after Mrs. Darwin’s death he said of her: ‘She has been my greatest blessing.... I do not believe she has ever missed an opportunity of doing a kind action to any one near her. I marvel at my good fortune that she, so infinitely my superior in every moral quality, consented to be my wife.’[115] And in the ardor of indiscriminating affection he adds a note of eulogy which could not perhaps be justly written by any one of any one: ‘I can declare that in my whole life I have never heard her utter one word I would rather have been unsaid.’[116]

Darwin’s constant ill-health gave a peculiar quality of intimate dependence to his relation to her whose care did most to make the ill-health tolerable, and Darwin’s son bears emphatic witness[Pg 194] to the unfailing devotion, thoughtfulness, and efficacy of that care. ‘For all the latter years of his life she never left him for a night; and her days were so planned that all his resting hours might be shared with her.’[117] Only those who have known the situation can fully appreciate the restraint and constraint involved in such chronic invalidism, not only for the one who bears, but perhaps still more for the one who must watch, and sympathize, and shield, and protect, and as far as possible keep off the pressure and strain of the crowding, noisy, bustling, indifferent world.

It is true that Mrs. Darwin was spared some of the more trying elements of such invalidism. It too often carries with it impatience, irritability, ill-temper, complaint, or at any rate a moody depression which refuses to be comforted or dissipated. We have seen that Darwin confessed to some quickness of temper in youth, but there appears to have been no sign of it whatever during the years of illness. He was not only gentle and considerate, he was almost always cheerful, even gay, and relished having love and cheerfulness and gayety about him. As Mrs. Darwin charmingly puts it: ‘It is a great happiness to me when Charles is most unwell that he continues just as sociable as ever,[Pg 195] and is not like the rest of the Darwins, who will not say how they really are; but he always tells me how he feels and never wants to be alone, but continues just as warmly affectionate as ever, so that I feel I am a comfort to him.’[118] Nor is there any sign of growing selfishness. An invalid must in a measure protect himself, he must make certain demands, and in many cases these necessary demands tend to grow into the inconsiderate and the morbidly engrossing. It does not seem to have been so with Darwin. He thought of others before himself, and kept his own needs and his own discomforts as much in the background as possible.

Nevertheless, he was an invalid, and his wife was well and vigorous, and could have mingled largely and freely with the world, and would doubtless have enjoyed it. Instead, she gave her life to him, and he fully appreciated the beauty and the constancy of her devotion. As his son says: ‘In her presence he found his happiness, and through her his life—which might have been overshadowed by gloom—became one of content and quiet gladness.’[119] But I think I feel most the human depth of the broken notes which Mrs. Darwin herself entered, recording the very last hours and words of her husband’s life: ‘I will only put down his words[Pg 196] afterwards—“I am not the least afraid of death.” “Remember what a good wife you have been to me.” “Tell all my children to remember how good they have been to me.” After the worst of the distress he said, “I was so sorry for you, but I could not help you.” Then, “I am glad of it,” when told I was lying down. “Don’t call her; I don’t want her.” Said often, “It’s almost worth while to be sick to be nursed by you.”’[120]

In his relations with his children Darwin is quite as winning as in that with his wife. He had a huge household of them, ten in all, boys and girls. His home-keeping habits brought him closely into contact with them, and he loved them, and they loved him. It is true that he appreciates the conflict of family cares with the one all-absorbing pursuit of life, appreciates it and states it with almost tragic force and compactness: ‘Children are one’s greatest happiness, but often and often a still greater misery. A man of science ought to have none—perhaps not a wife; for then there would be nothing in this wide world worth caring for, and a man might (whether he could is another question) work away like a Trojan.’[121] With which it is interesting to compare the similar complaint of an equally devoted father, Thomas Moore: ‘My anxiety[Pg 197] about these children almost embitters all my enjoyment of them.’[122]

But the anxiety arose simply from an excess of thought and care and fondness, and assuredly few fathers have been more devoted than Darwin was. There is no sign whatever that he was severe or harsh in his discipline. His son says that he never spoke an angry word to one of his children in his life. Yet he somehow managed to get things done as he wished: ‘I am certain that it never entered our heads to disobey him.’[123] The ease and comradeship with which he worked appear in one anecdote told by Francis: ‘He came into the drawing-room and found Leonard dancing about on the sofa, which was forbidden, for the sake of the springs, and said, “Oh, Lenny, Lenny, that’s against all rules,” and received for answer, “Then, I think you’d better go out of the room.”’[124] But I do not imagine that Leonard did any more dancing.

The basis of all discipline was sympathy and understanding, just as these were the basis of Darwin’s dealings with his fellow-scientists; and in his respect for his children’s personality and individuality he seems to have anticipated the ideas of a later age. His daughter says: ‘Another characteristic of his treatment of his children was his respect for[Pg 198] their liberty, and for their personality.... Our father and mother would not even wish to know what we were doing or thinking unless we wished to tell. He always made us feel that we were each of us creatures whose opinions and thoughts were valuable to him, so that whatever there was best in us came out in the sunshine of his presence.’[125]

We have already seen what care Darwin took at all times in regard to his childrens’ comfort in money matters. There was the same solicitude in all their affairs, as to their education, their conduct, and especially their prospects and their pursuits and occupations in life. He was always ready with advice and counsel when they were wanted. But he did not intrude them unduly, and above all things he did not insist upon their acceptance, or urge that his opinion and maxims should be made the rule of procedure. How admirably characteristic is his saying that ‘he hoped none of his sons would ever believe anything because he said it, unless they were themselves convinced of its truth.’[126]

It is, it seems to me, merely delightful to feel that through all this interest and affection Darwin was constantly using his children, as he used himself, and everybody else, as material for the abstract scientific observation which was the main[Pg 199] interest of his life. ‘My first child was born on December 27th, 1839,’ he tells us, ‘and I at once commenced to make notes on the first dawn of the various expressions which he exhibited.’[217] How many fathers would have done as much? And the constant, watchful observation was continued at all times.

But it did not in the least interfere with the abundant, overflowing, sympathetic affection. And the affection was not distant, of the sort which adores but cannot enter in. His son indeed points out that health prevented his father’s romping with the children or taking part in any rough play. But he shared their games, so far as he could, with eager interest and keen enjoyment, and made them feel that he was one of themselves and as themselves. When they all went off on a holiday, he entered into it with a youthfulness of enthusiasm which intensified the enthusiasm of everybody. He liked to have the children about, even if they interrupted his work, as they too frequently did; such a multitude of them in a house would be likely to. Especially when they were ill, his sympathetic care and watchfulness were soothing and comforting. His daughter quotes one of his cousins as a witness that ‘in our house the only place where[Pg 200] you might be sure of not meeting a child, was the nursery. Many a time, even during my father’s working hours, was a sick child tucked up on his sofa, to be quiet, and safe, and soothed by his presence.’[218]

Dread of the children’s illness and death at times haunted and oppressed him. Thus he writes to Hooker: ‘To the day of my death I shall never forget all the sickening fear about the other children, after our poor little baby died.’[219] And the depth of his grief after losing his little daughter Annie appears quietly but profoundly in the letters written at that time.

As years passed, Darwin’s relation to his children reached its climax of comradeship in the constant assistance they gave him in his work. His daughter helped him clerically, and his sons, who had scientific interests of their own, participated actively and most profitably in his labors. Sometimes he made use of their keen wits to sharpen and clarify his: ‘Two of my grown-up children who are acute reasoners have two or three times at intervals tried to prove me wrong; and when your letter came they had another try, but ended by coming back to my side.’[220] Whatever the nature of the assistance might be, Darwin was always profoundly grateful[Pg 201] for it, and his children speak particularly of the simple, humble fashion in which his gratitude was expressed. It was a pleasure to help him in any way, because you were sure that the help would be used as you meant it and would be thoroughly appreciated.

And in general I do not know that the beauty of Darwin’s relation to his children can be better expressed than in the words of his son, equally honorable to son and to father: ‘I do not think his exaggerated sense of our good qualities, intellectual or moral, made us conceited, as might perhaps have been expected, but rather more humble and grateful to him. The reason being no doubt that the influence of his character, of his sincerity and greatness of nature, had a much deeper and more lasting effect than any small exaltation which his praises or admiration may have caused to our vanity.’[221]

IV
Though Darwin’s social activity was necessarily restricted by his ill-health, his devotion to special friends was as sweet and notable as his devotion to his family. Indeed, friendship, the natural turning to sympathetic spirits, and clinging to them[Pg 202] with constant loyalty, seems to have been a peculiarly profound and powerful instinct in him. He took a deep interest in all his friends’ affairs, and poured out all his own interests to them with intimate and appealing effusiveness. In writing of his grandfather, he says: ‘There is, perhaps, no safer test of a man’s real character than that of his long continued friendship with good and able men.’[222] Assuredly, if the test is applied to himself, he bears it nobly.

Of his longing for friendship and great aptness for it in boyhood he speaks very positively: ‘I had many friends amongst the schoolboys, whom I loved dearly, and I think that my disposition was then very affectionate.’[223] His son says that the friendships of mature life had not quite the zest and passion of those of youth; but the son adds with justice that no one who reads his father’s letters can feel that his later affections were lacking in intensity or depth.[224]

There can be no doubt that Darwin’s influence over his friends was very great, probably all the more so because he was so unassertive and disinclined to interfere or to dictate. Sir John Lubbock is said to have ‘owed to the great Charles Darwin even a larger debt in the respect of character[Pg 203] formation than in the encouragement and direction of his mental gifts.’[225] Darwin did not hesitate to advise urgently and warmly, where he felt that advice was needed. For example, he writes to Hooker about his health: ‘Take warning by me, and do not work too hard. For God’s sake, think of this.’[226] He did not hesitate to differ, or to question, or to argue, when he thought his friends were wrong, and he could set them right.

At the same time, owing to his humility and natural self-effacement, the chief impression one gets from the intimate personal correspondence is that of turning to friends for counsel, encouragement, and support. Not that he was not amply able and ready to stand on his own feet; but to develop his views and arguments to others seemed to clarify them and to give them added force and significance for himself: ‘I will write no more, which is a great virtue in me; for it is to me a very great pleasure telling you everything I do.’[227] Honor, commendation, appreciation, when they came from the public, were all very well; but their value and their charm were doubled when they came from those one loved. Thus, he writes in regard to a letter of Hooker, congratulating him on the receipt of a medal: ‘I then opened yours, and such is[Pg 204] the effect of warmth, friendship, and kindness from one that is loved, that the very same fact, told as you told it, made me glow with pleasure till my very heart throbbed.’[228] I have already alluded to his expressions of gratitude and appreciation for all the support and assistance that his friends gave him; but the expression is so tender, and so constant, and so thoroughly characteristic, that it cannot be too much insisted upon.

Nor was Darwin’s affection for his friends lacking in the practical side any more than in the sentimental. He was ready to give his time and his strength in their service, though time was so limited and strength so much needed and so essential. When utter prostration makes assistance impossible, he reproaches himself bitterly, and zealously offers to make up the defect. As when he writes to Hooker: ‘I write now to say that I am uneasy in my conscience about hesitating to look over your proofs, but I was feeling miserably unwell and shattered when I wrote. I do not suppose I could be of hardly any use, but if I could, pray send me any proofs. I should be (and I fear I was) the most ungrateful man to hesitate to do anything for you after some fifteen or more years’ help from you.’[229] Or, in slighter matters, the sacrifice is given a[Pg 205] humorous turn, as when Darwin visits his old friend Sedgwick and allows himself to be put through the sights of the Museum without protest though he suffers for the effort for a long time afterwards: ‘Is it not humiliating to be thus killed by a man of eighty-six, who evidently never dreamed that he was killing me?’[230]

And if time and strength, so vital and in general miserly hoarded, were not spared, it is easy to imagine that money was not. Scientists are not always wealthy, and their researches require ample means for their prosecution. Scientists wear themselves out in eager toil and then are too often hard put to it for funds with which to recuperate. Darwin was always watchful, interested, ready, generous, and best of all unobtrusive in supplying these needs. If his closest friend and supporter Huxley broke down, Darwin was quick to head a subscription to make recovery possible. If he heard that a fellow-worker in Germany, who was accomplishing great results with small means, was hampered and embarrassed for lack of books, he writes at once: ‘Forgive me, but why should you not order through your brother Hermann, books, etc., to the amount of £100, and I would send a check to him as soon as I heard the exact amount?[Pg 206] This would be no inconvenience to me; on the contrary, it would be an honor and lasting pleasure to me to have aided you in your invaluable scientific work to this small and trifling extent.’[231]

But the merely material relation of support and assistance was a small affair compared to the profound affection which Darwin seemed peculiarly calculated to convey and inspire. The note of this affection sounds through all his correspondence and gives it a more winning quality than almost anything else. How deep and strong was his friends’ regard for him is nicely indicated in the passage in which Huxley analyzes the bearing of it upon his work and success: ‘I cannot agree with you, again, that the acceptance of Darwin’s views was in any way influenced by the strong affection entertained for him by many of his friends. What the affection really did was to lead those of his friends who had seen good reason for his views to take much more trouble in his defense and support and to strike out much harder at his adversary than they would otherwise have done. This is pardonable, if not justifiable—that which you suggest would to my mind be neither.’[232]

As for Darwin’s own feeling, I know nothing that brings it home more vividly, when one considers[Pg 207] his zeal for his work and for success with it, than the passage in which he declares such success and everything else to be trash beside love: “Talk of fame, honor, pleasure, wealth, all are dirt compared with affection; and this is a doctrine which, I know, from your letter, that you will agree with from the bottom of your heart.’[233] After which I think we may conclude generally that few human beings have been more endowed than Charles Darwin with tenderness and sympathy for all created things.’

[Pg 208]

CHAPTER VI
DARWIN: THE DESTROYER
I
In studying the influence of Darwin and Darwinism, it is well to begin by realizing clearly the crude orthodox religious conceptions which prevailed with the mass of mankind through the Middle Ages and well into the nineteenth century, as they prevail still in some form among large portions of the population in Europe and America. According to these conceptions the universe was created by an omnipotent, thoroughly anthropomorphic Deity. In that universe the terrestrial globe occupied a most important, if not a central and pivotal position. The globe was peopled by living beings, each created by the Deity in its particular form and kind, and all, like the whole existing universe, subordinated to man, who alone was endowed with a reasoning intellect and a moral nature. Thus gifted, he was an object of peculiar solicitude to his Creator, who interfered in every aspect of human fate, and whose favor could be secured and his wrath deprecated by prayer and by the conformity of human conduct to the divine decrees.[Pg 209] In other words, the earth was the primary object of the universe, and man was the primary object of the earth, and hence of the universe also.

The speculations of Copernicus and the consequent development in modern astronomy, showing that the earth was not the center of the universe at all, but merely an insignificant and utterly inconsequential speck in the vastness of stellar space, gave this orthodox view a shattering shock. If the earth was of no consequence, how could man’s consequence be supreme? Theology, with its fortunate gift of agile adaptation, after first combating the new astronomy with all its zeal, finally worked out to a belated acceptance of what could not be resisted, and then ingeniously contrived, by huge effort of reasoning, to reconcile science with orthodox views and to restore man to his supremacy. But just when this had been happily and satisfactorily accomplished, along came Darwin, and shattered human distinction and superiority, and with them the ancient ideas of Deity, even more completely than Copernicus had done. It is no wonder that theology, exhausted by the earlier struggle, was at times inclined to balk and give up the contest.

What interests us first is Darwin’s own attitude[Pg 210] toward the far-reaching consequences of his theory. In an earlier chapter we have considered his religious views, so far as they affected him personally. We are now concerned with the larger aspect of their effect upon mankind as a whole.

That he was conscious of possible effects from the start is evident. He had lived closely enough in contact with the orthodox attitude to appreciate the results of disturbing it, and the deeper results of disturbing the fundamental principles upon which it was based. Nevertheless, he does not appear to have felt, or at least to have been haunted by, the dread of a solitary and God-abandoned universe that afflicts some of us. He was sensitive to concrete fears: ‘You will then get rest, and I do hope some lull in anxiety and fear. Nothing is so dreadful in this life as fear; it still sickens me when I cannot help remembering some of the many illnesses our children have endured.’[154] But his general mental attitude was so healthy and so practical that he was not too much troubled by remote apprehensions and dim spiritual possibilities. Thus he was inclined to take an optimistic view of the workings of natural selection. He believed that, on the whole, the sum of happiness exceeded that of misery for sentient beings,[155] and he felt that indefinite[Pg 211] progress and advancement for man were perfectly compatible with the conclusions to which his scientific study led him. As he puts it in ‘The Descent of Man’: ‘To believe that man was aboriginally civilized and then suffered utter degradation in so many regions, is to take a pitiably low view of human nature. It is apparently a truer and more cheerful view that progress has been much more general than retrogression; that man has risen, though by slow and interrupted steps, from a lowly condition to the highest standard as yet attained by him in knowledge, morals, and religion.’[156] With these undeniably optimistic leanings on Darwin’s part in mind, it is amusing to read Lyell’s remark, that ‘he had frequently been asked if Darwin was not one of the most unhappy of men, it being suggested that his outrage upon public opinion should have filled him with remorse.’[157]

At the same time, Darwin was perfectly aware that his theories tended to shatter the orthodox view of man and his supremacy and even the orthodox God. The sheer, simple statement of the matter appears in one vivid phrase: ‘What a book a devil’s chaplain might write on the clumsy, wasteful, blundering, low, and horribly cruel works of nature!’[158] Especially Darwin knew well what fierce[Pg 212] hostility he should evoke from those who had grown up in the orthodox belief, were wedded to it by all the force of habit and tradition, and were intellectually unqualified to adapt themselves to any other. Therefore, from the beginning, he proceeded with the greatest caution and moderation of statement. This arose partly from his sweetness of temper. He had no desire to wound or destroy, except as the truth might compel him to do so. One early critic speaks admirably of ‘the magnanimous simplicity of character which in rising above all petty and personal feeling delivered a thought-reversing doctrine to mankind with as little disturbance as possible of the deeply rooted sentiments of the age.’[159]

It was this caution and considerateness that induced him to write such passages as the conclusion of the ‘Origin’ with its interesting introduction for later editions of the phrase ‘by the Creator’ in the last sentence.[160] And the caution did not result wholly from timidity or unwillingness to shock, but was also brought about by Darwin’s natural reluctance to commit himself in regions where he did not feel at home, or to take one step beyond the properly scientific province which he had really made his own. As to ultimate questions he confessed[Pg 213] himself to be in ‘a muddle,’[161] and why should he interfere with the more definite creed of others?

On the other hand, where his conclusions were clear and well established, he meant to speak out, and let the truth prevail, without regard to the feelings of anybody. He wanted to sustain no cause, to push no argument for itself, he wanted facts and nothing else. And when he feels that he has yielded too much to popular prejudice and to the desire to conciliate it, his regret is decided and he determines to do so no more: ‘I have long regretted that I truckled to public opinion, and used the Pentateuchal term of creation, by which I really meant “appeared” by some wholly unknown process. It is mere rubbish, thinking at present of the origin of life; one might as well think of the origin of matter.’[162]

As regards this world, in questions of morals, of conduct, and generally of the bearing of evolution on sociology, Darwin’s own sturdy moral habit and self-poised temperament made him perhaps unduly optimistic. Temptation had little hold upon him. Why should it have more upon others, even unsustained by celestial guidance and control? In ‘The Descent of Man’ he endeavors to show the social instinct as a sufficient and satisfactory basis[Pg 214] for upright living: ‘We have seen that even at an early period in the history of man, the expressed wishes of the community will have naturally influenced to a large extent the conduct of each member.... Thus the reproach is removed of laying the foundation of the noblest part of our nature in the base principle of selfishness.’[163] And elsewhere he adds, ‘It is not improbable that after long practice virtuous tendencies may be inherited.’[164] Yet the deadly, grinding, destroying implications of the struggle for existence do crop out everywhere, and the best intentioned efforts do not altogether disguise them: ‘It may be difficult, but we ought to admire the savage instinctive hatred of the queen-bee, which urges her to destroy the young queens, her daughters, as soon as they are born, or to perish herself in the combat; for undoubtedly this is for the good of the community; and maternal love or maternal hatred, though the latter fortunately is most rare, is all the same to the inexorable principle of natural selection.’[165] While Darwin’s optimism as to possible consequences appears, it seems to me, in a note to the ‘Descent.’ He is commenting on an article of Miss Cobb, in which she says, referring to his ethical explanations, ‘I cannot but believe that in the hour of their triumph would[Pg 215] be sounded the knell of the virtue of mankind.’ On which Darwin remarks comfortably, ‘It is to be hoped that the belief in the permanence of virtue on this earth is not held by many persons on so weak a tenure.’[166]

When it comes to the bearing of evolution on another world, Darwin’s attitude is equally interesting, and equally inconclusive. To me one of the most characteristic and suggestive sentences he ever wrote occurs in a letter to Wallace, of August, 1872 (italics mine): ‘Perhaps the mere reiteration of the statements given by Dr. Bastian and by other men, whose judgment I respect, and who have worked long on the lower organisms, would suffice to convince me. Here is a fine confession of intellectual weakness; but what an inexplicable frame of mind is that of belief.’[167] The implications here are almost fathomless, but it is clear enough that to Darwin belief in general was not a spiritual necessity of his being, but merely came with the overwhelming obtrusion of fact.

In regard to a future life, Darwin recognized, in a passage I have quoted earlier, that a belief in it was needed to complete the process established here, and the dire necessity of the belief comes out clearly in the passage suggesting the tragic physical[Pg 216] future of this earth: ‘I quite agree how humiliating the slow progress of man is, but every one has his own pet horror, and this slow progress ... sinks in my mind into insignificance compared with the idea or rather I presume certainty of the sun some day cooling and we all freezing. To think of the progress of millions of years with every continent swarming with good and enlightened men, all ending in this, and with probably no fresh start until this our planetary system has been again converted into red-hot gas.’[168]

Yet when the question of the future has been debated over and over, the result, as with other questions, is complete muddle and puzzle, and all that can be said of them is: ‘The conclusion that I always come to after thinking of such questions is that they are beyond the human intellect; and the less one thinks on them, the better.’[169] What at least stands out, is that Darwin does not greatly concern himself with the enormous dislocation of life in this world which is likely to follow the loss of belief in another.

And again, there is evolution and God. Darwin frequently insists that he is no atheist, and that his system must not be charged with any atheistical conclusion: ‘Let each man hope and believe what[Pg 217] he can. Certainly I agree with you that my views are not at all necessarily atheistical.’[170] The belief in God is eminently useful: ‘With the more civilized races, the conviction of the existence of an all-seeing Deity has had a potent influence on the advance of morality.’[171] At every convenient opportunity God is given fair play and a fighting chance: it rests with Him to make the most of it. At the same time, the obstacles and difficulties are mountainous and it would appear insuperable. Thus, there is the conclusion of ‘Plants and Animals Under Domestication’: ‘If we assume that each particular variation was from the beginning of all time preordained, then that plasticity of organization, which leads to many injurious deviations of structure, as well as the redundant power of reproduction which inevitably leads to a struggle for existence, and, as a consequence, to the natural selection or survival of the fittest, must appear to us superfluous laws of nature. On the other hand, an omnipotent and omniscient Creator ordains everything and foresees everything. Thus we are brought face to face with a difficulty as insoluble as is that of free will and predestination.’[172]

But the result in any case, if God is left in His universe at all, is to remove Him very, very far[Pg 218] away, and completely to demolish all sense of His intervention in the little daily actions and experiences of common life and all intimate communion and conference with Him in regard to those actions. When ‘The Descent of Man’ is published, Mrs. Darwin writes to her daughter, quite simply: ‘I think it will be very interesting, but that I shall dislike it very much as again putting God further off.’[173] For others besides Mrs. Darwin it reduced Him quite to the vanishing point.

But if Darwin himself was contented to let God alone, so far as possible, the more ardent and zealous of Darwin’s followers were inclined to hustle the Creator out of the universe altogether. This was especially true of the aggressive Darwinians in Germany. They extended the deductions of evolution to all the practical workings of human life in a fashion which Darwin distinctly disapproved: ‘What a foolish idea seems to prevail in Germany,’ he writes, ‘on the connection between Socialism and Evolution through Natural Selection.’[174] To Darwin’s energetic disciple, Weisman, the evolutionary theory seemed as solidly established as that of gravitation: ‘We know just as surely as that the earth goes round the sun, that the living world upon our earth was not created all at once and in[Pg 219] the state in which we know it, but that it has gradually evolved through what, to our human estimate, seem enormously long periods of time.’[175] And in Weisman’s opinion, evolution would go on creating adequate moral ideals, as it has done in the past: ‘The number of those who act in accordance with the ideals of purer, higher humanity, in whom the care for others and for the whole will limit care for self, will, it is my belief, increase with time and lead to higher ethical conceptions, as it has already done within the period of human existence known to us.’[176] Häckel substituted an exuberant, triumphant materialistic atheism for the crawling superstitions of an earlier day.

In England Huxley endeavored to emphasize the complete separation of religion and science, though no one really knew better than he how fatally they interlock at every step. Spencer, in providing evolution with a metaphysical apparatus, extended its bearing into all the regions of speculative thought. It is not probable that he is much read at present, but his ‘First Principles’ spread a wide leaven of agnosticism among the youth of a generation ago, and I do not know where you will find a more desolating statement of the possible barrenness of evolutionary results than in the conclusion[Pg 220] of his Autobiography: ‘Then behind these mysteries lies the all-embracing mystery—whence this universal transformation which has gone on unceasingly throughout a past eternity and will go on unceasingly throughout a future eternity? And along with this rises the paralyzing thought—what if, of all this that is thus incomprehensible to us, there exists no comprehension anywhere? No wonder that men take refuge in authoritative dogma.... Lastly come the insoluble questions concerning our own fate: the evidence seeming so strong that the relations of mind and nervous structure are such that cessation of the one accompanies dissolution of the other, while simultaneously comes the thought, so strange and so difficult to realize, that with death there lapses both the consciousness of existence and the consciousness of having existed.’[177]

II
After considering Darwin’s view of the practical working of his discovery, it is interesting to sum up, so far as is possible in such vague and indefinite matters, one’s own impression of the effect of the popular acceptance of that discovery. And here I must emphasize that I am not dealing with philosophical[Pg 221] or scientific theories, least of all with any such theories of my own, but am simply trying to suggest what seem to me the indirect and secondary workings of scientific theory in the minds of vast masses of people, even of those conventionally connected with the churches of various denominations. It is hardly necessary to say that Darwin’s own teaching cannot be held directly responsible for those workings, and that many of them he would have completely rejected. Moreover, it must also be recognized that Darwin in large measure summarized and embodied the general scientific drift of the age. Especially we must not overlook the immense influence of practical as well as theoretical science in affecting contemporary life. An excellent editorial in the Saturday Review of Literature (May 8, 1926) emphasizes the importance of scientific invention and machinery on nineteenth- and twentieth-century living, and this importance, both direct and indirect, is almost incalculable. For example, printing has spread thought among the masses. The sewing-machine has changed the world of woman. The extraordinary development of transportation has enormously increased the superficial bustle and distraction of life, to the serious detriment of meditative[Pg 222] and spiritual interests. Nevertheless, the evolutionary theory may be regarded as typifying and formulating all these complicated tendencies more fully and effectively than any other. How the theory has worked is well suggested in the pregnant words of Professor Osborn, though he is careful to insist that it is the misunderstanding, not the understanding, of evolutionary doctrine, that has caused the evil: ‘It may be said without scientific or religious prejudice that the world-wide loss of the older religious and Biblical foundation of morals has been one of the chief causes of human decadence in conduct, in literature, and in art. This, however, is partly due to a complete misunderstanding of creative evolution, which is a process of ascent, not of descent.’[178]

Let us attempt to follow the workings of evolution in various phases of life and thought. Take, first, politics. We cannot perhaps establish two strongly opposed points of view in regard to the phenomena of political life better than by contrasted quotations. President Coolidge, speaking on October 29, 1926, said: ‘I do not know any adequate support for our form of government except that which comes from religion.’[179] Professor Keller, writing of ‘Societal Evolution,’ says: ‘What moves men ...[Pg 223] is not thought, but emotion. And what sets emotion going is interest.... What sets the revolutions in motion, with the result of drastic selection in the codes, is not the cerebration of any one over great issues, but the unendurable discomfort and awakened emotions of the masses. Their interests have been so outraged that anything seems likely to be better than the present.’[180]

The great democratic movement of the past hundred and fifty years naturally far antedated Darwinism. Its roots were laid in the eighteenth century, with the teachings of the French philosophers, chiefly Rousseau, and the practical action of the American and French Revolutions. But the views of evolutionary science fitted admirably with the intense individualism of democracy, its proclamation of the right of the individual man to assert himself against every and all others, high or low, rich or poor.

After democracy has made its way in the world, it is interesting to see the effort of theology to claim it and to urge that the value and importance of the individual is a gradual effect and an essential element of Christian doctrine. It is true that Christianity has always proclaimed the equality of all souls before God and their equal need of salvation.[Pg 224] But it is equally true that the Church has always got along comfortably with every sort of tyranny and for centuries solemnly sponsored the divine right of kings, alleging at all times the unfailing text, ‘Render unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s.’ And it is more deeply true that the natural Christian emphasis upon the importance of another world tends to create indifference to the political concerns of this, so that, even in the middle of the nineteenth century, revivalists like Moody could regard political movements and reforms as matters of minor consequence in face of the imminent cataclysm which would wipe out this world and its doings altogether. The most vigorous and energetic insistence on the rights of man as a mortal came from those who concerned themselves very little with his immortality.

And if indifference to the other world affected politics, it has had an even greater effect in the more general regions of sociology. So long as the poor and wretched were taught—by the rich—that their sojourn here was infinitesimally insignificant compared with the bliss that awaited them hereafter, they could endure with comparative patience. Lazarus could let the dogs lick his sores with fair content, while he was comforted with the reflection[Pg 225] that an equally bad day was coming for Dives, and a great deal more of it. But when he became convinced that this world was all, Lazarus bestirred himself, and invented Socialism and Anarchism and Bolshevism and many other isms with capital letters, which might enable him to attend to the matter of Dives right here and to see to it that, if he himself could not share all the blessings of the rich, at least the rich might be made as miserable as he. We have become so gradually accustomed to an adjustment to the standpoint of this world that we hardly realize how completely and vastly it has entered into the views and opinions of even those who do not explicitly admit it.

Take again the influence of science in the realm of art. From the close of the eighteenth century external nature began to play a rôle in the arts that it had never played before and the prominence of landscape in painting was as notable as natural description in literature. But during the first half of the nineteenth century this natural influence was romantic, imaginative, emotional. With the middle years the scientific tendency made itself felt, and art became more closely and intensely realistic. This is perhaps most generally obvious in the literary world, and the great novelists[Pg 226] of France from Balzac on embody the scientific movement of which Darwin is so eminently representative. Most significant of all in this regard is the great epic of Zola, the history of the Rougon-Macquart family, in twenty solid volumes. I am not for a moment vouching for the solidity of Zola’s science, which may be quite as fantastic in its way as the romance of Dumas. The point is that Zola believed himself to be typifying and illustrating scientific tendencies, and that the popularly accepted notion of the struggle for existence, with all its blind and bitter cruelty, its pitiful tragedy of the warfare and merciless destruction of the animal world, was transferred to humanity in the endless pages, as gloomy as they are powerful, of the great French imaginative drama. And it is interesting, as we come right down to the present day, to find a thoughtful critic attributing the ugly and realistic tendencies of current American fiction not to any passing upheaval caused by the World-War, but to just this gradual influence of scientific thought making itself felt everywhere: ‘What we are looking at is not the product of a decade or an episode, even so supreme an episode as battle, but the fructifying of scientific doctrines that for several decades have been seeping into society. What we are witnessing[Pg 227] is the yielding of the romantic view of life to the scientific.’[181]

Thus scientific conceptions, working in the popular mind, have fixed it upon the affairs of this world, and have reduced the various phases of the other, formerly so immensely important, to a shadowy inconsistency. Science, for example, has disposed of hell with ludicrous completeness. The old material hell, as Dante and the Middle Ages viewed it, a repository definitely under ground, with devils busily engaged over boiling cauldrons, has surely vanished, never to return. In the scientifically arranged physical universe there is no place for it. Even my friend Moody, whose ideas of heaven were so specific, does not attempt any such physical location of hell. And it is true that the orthodox still take refuge in moral torments, prolonged if not eternal horrors, which the erring spirit in wilful perversity inflicts upon itself. But it is doubtful if even the orthodox continue to take even these very seriously. There cannot be many persons who still suffer from the brooding gloom with which the concrete vision of hell genuinely oppressed thousands of sensitive souls in ages past. And in some respects this may be set down as a gain, since the misery to the sensitive souls was[Pg 228] very real, while how far the fear of hell acted as a deterrent to souls of another order is always open to question. But, gain or loss, it will hardly be disputed that the boiling depths of hell have largely boiled away.

Unfortunately hell, in departing, has shown a marked tendency to drag heaven with it. The same material difficulty of course obtains here also. Moody used to proclaim that heaven was tangible, mapable, a city like New York, only with more agreeable streets and doubtless better traffic arrangements. But it is hard for the most devout believer to-day to take so concrete a view. And it is not only that the pearly gates and golden pavements have gone. Their disappearance has given a rude jar to the belief in any kind of future life whatever. I am merely speaking of the average American man in the street, and perhaps of even the woman also. The negative views in such matters announced shortly before his death by so good, so upright, so in the largest sense Christian a man as Luther Burbank, are beyond a doubt the views more or less definitely formulated of millions of men in America to-day. The best they can say is, that it is their business to live the life here in the most energetic, straightforward, profitable way[Pg 229] they can, to see that after their deaths their wives and children are provided for, and to leave any other lives to take care of themselves.

And then there is the question of God, and it seems that He has a tendency to vanish also, with the disappearance of His celestial habitation, so that I feel a pathetic touch of tenderness for departed grandeur in capitalizing the pronoun. The scientific sequence of cause and effect has permeated so thoroughly the minds of even those who do not think of it in formal terms that the old feeling of the intervention of Divine Providence in daily affairs and the old intimate relation with a personal Father have been greatly weakened where they have not been altogether forgotten. As Mrs. Darwin suggests, God grows further and further away. It is sometimes urged that this remoteness is connected with a deeper and more serious reverence, that our relation to the immanent Deity has become more worthily and profoundly spiritual; but there is great danger of revering Him out of existence. In the Middle Ages men treated God as familiarly as if He were a friend round the corner, but they felt Him.

Worship, at any rate Protestant worship, tends to lose its devotional character and the overpowering[Pg 230] sense of the Divine presence, and to become a mere polite fraternizing for social purposes. You hear many people say that they worship God better alone in the fields than in the churches. As to some of the churches the feeling is natural enough, but I wonder how many think of Him on the golf-links, except in the form of profanity, or in the hurry and swirl of traffic-crowded highways, or even in the fields, if anybody ever gets there any more. And prayer? I have spoken in connection with Darwin of my old friend who prayed, though he had nothing to pray to. It may be that more keep up the habit than we suppose. But with how many is it still a passionate intercession for divine help in their daily needs or a means of self-forgetful communion with the comforting, supporting, everlasting Arms? How many boys still pray to have fence-rails lifted off them or to win in their games of baseball and football? Can we possibly conceive such a state of things as is indicated in Finney’s description of a revival a hundred years ago? ‘Indeed the town was full of prayer. Go where you would, you heard the voice of prayer. Pass along the street and if two or three Christians happened to be together, they were praying. Wherever they met, they prayed.’[Pg 231][182]

The most striking of all the dislocations effected by the intrusion of the scientific attitude is in the banishment of sin. Not only original sin has been swept away with the disappearance of the older theology and the establishment of evolutionary doctrines, but the uneasy, haunting torment of conscience and remorse appears to have been greatly diminished. No doubt it still, as always, chiefly harasses those who have least need of it. No doubt some persons still vex themselves to agony for imaginary sins. But vast numbers, especially of the younger generation, are like the heroine of Lemâitre’s play, ‘a little woman who without any very definite idea of the meaning of positivism, Darwinism, struggle for life, etc., lives in a moral atmosphere impregnated with all these things.’[183] And as a consequence, her moral attitude undergoes the great transformation of the modern world, by which an old-fashioned sin becomes simply a new-fashioned mistake. In other words, expediency, the belief that it does not pay to do wrong, takes the place of the old divine sanction, divine command, divine reward and punishment.

There are many who take a very sanguine view of all this. To them it seems that the old, instinctive sense of sin was stupid and caused far more[Pg 232] misery than it cured. Expediency, or enlightened self-interest, working with the larger interest of the community, is expected more and more effectively and satisfactorily to take the place of the older categorical imperative. But to others it seems that expediency is but a chill and slender reed to lean upon when the stress of passion and temptation comes. ‘Oaths,’ says Shakespeare, ‘are straw to the fire i’ the blood.’ The dread of hell was often a mild deterrent enough, but it is doubtful whether remote considerations of expediency will suffice to deter even so effectively as hell-fire.

To these old-fashioned and conservative persons it seems likely that the decay of a divine origin will weaken and break down the springs of moral action and that in an enlightened self-interest the enlightenment is hardly powerful enough to abolish the selfishness. Some of these persons have even been disposed to see in the World War something at least of the culmination of evolutionary doctrines about the struggle for life and survival of the fittest, and it is certainly in the protest against these doctrines that the Fundamentalists find their best justification for attempting to set back and repress the movement of human thought, if there were any justification whatever for the unwisdom of[Pg 233] an effort to dam the Mississippi with a sheet of paper.

III
When we turn from the popular acceptance of evolution and its workings, we may, if we choose, find plenty of interpretations of the theorists yielding a different result.

Long before Darwin’s day evolution, in the sense of a larger process of development and unfolding in the universe, had been foreshadowed and cherished by the philosophers. Not to speak of the Greeks, the successors of Kant in Germany had, each in his way, devised some dynamic explanation of the spiritual world. Fichte had built his mystical metaphysic of the ego, Schelling had worked out his scheme of the adjustment of the I and the Not-I, Hegel had erected his superb logical edifice on the framework of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, starting with the elements of being and non-being reconciled in the progressive thesis of becoming, which in itself seems to have the germ of the whole evolutionary development. Schopenhauer and Hartmann had followed somewhat similar lines in their pessimistic treatment of the Will and the Unconscious. So again, the thinking[Pg 234] of our own Emerson not only anticipates Darwin in such detail as the lines I have already quoted,

‘And striving to be man, the worm
Mounts through all the spires of form,’
but is eminently suggestive of evolution in the intensely dynamic, developmental quality of his thought, which perhaps also, in its suggestion of a Pantheistic indifference to immortality, may be said to be as destructive to humbler human hopes as Darwin was.

Also, there are the philosophers who, obviously coming within the scope of evolution and Darwinism, transform and transfigure them with a certain divine radiance and spiritual change. There is William James. Forty years ago I happened to ride in a horse-car opposite James, who was talking with all his splendid, eager enthusiasm to a pupil sitting beside him. James said that for a time he had been oppressed by the gloom of Schopenhauer’s pessimism. Then he had pulled himself together and made up his mind that the true course for him was to get rid of all the evil within his own reach, so far as he personally could, and let the broader working of the universe take care of itself. Here we see the germ which later grew into the splendid fabric of Pragmatism, the belief that the Spirit, which made[Pg 235] the world of evolving phenomena, was itself a thing of dynamic growth and force, able to create by its own native energy a future and a reality and a God that should embody its highest ideals. A parallel development appears in the ‘Creative Evolution’ of Bergson, the theory of the creative spirit perpetually evolving in richer, more splendid, more satisfying forms, through the eternal depths of a luminous future. From the day when Darwin’s views were first announced up to this very moment, up to the publication of such books as Professor Whitehead’s ‘Science and Modern Thought’ and Professor Lloyd Morgan’s ‘Emergent Evolution,’ thinkers have been busily at work devising interpretations and developments of the evolutionary doctrine, regardless of conflict and divergence, in the spirit of Professor Whitehead’s admirable saying, ‘A clash of doctrines is not a disaster—it is an opportunity.’ The results are somewhat bewildering, and perhaps rarely satisfying to any but the thinkers themselves, but they are at least stimulating and suggestive.

And there are the achievements of the clergy. As I have earlier pointed out, it took many generations of herculean effort to get the Bible and the Copernican theory into harmony, but by endless[Pg 236] processes of the reasonable wriggling which so much amused Darwin in himself and others[184] the two were contentedly brought together. Then appeared this later disturber of the peace, and at first the theologians despaired. But when did a theologian ever quite despair? Mankind must have God, must have Christ, must have the Bible, and above all things must have a priesthood. If Darwinism did away with the first three, I ask you what would the priesthood do for a living? Therefore the contending elements must be reconciled, and should be. Science in contradiction with religion? Fie! Never! Why, science only clarifies religion, and religion enriches and fructifies science. The marriage of the two is triumphantly proclaimed in the joyous cry of Dr. Cadman, which typifies thousands of others, and demonstrates that everything is for the best in the best of all possible clerical worlds: ‘So far from evolution being incompatible with religion, it is of all scientific theories the most easily accommodated to the demands of faith. In itself the evolutionary hypothesis supplies to all scientists and believers in religion one of the noblest conceptions of the creative mind to be found anywhere in literature. The idea of progressive development culminating in perfectibility contains[Pg 237] the most radiant optimism extant to-day.’[185] It would be difficult to improve upon the splendor of that passage, but it offers vast food for meditation. Somehow I turn from it instinctively to the comment of Darwin upon one of his orthodox admirers: ‘How funny men’s minds are! He says he is chiefly converted because my books make the Birth of Christ, Redemption by Grace, etc., plain to him!’[186] How funny men’s minds are!

And then there come along those pestilent Fundamentalists, with whom some of us are much inclined to sympathize, and declare that Darwinism shatters the Bible and Christ altogether. But the Bible, as they read it, is infallible. Therefore Darwinism must be wrong: let us crush it, and grind it, and stamp it out of the world.

The optimism of the scientists is quite as persistent and perhaps a little more convincing than that of the theologians. There are first those whom, without meaning any slur, one may call the pseudo-scientists, writers who have had no special scientific training or experience or discipline, but who apply their quick literary wit to the consideration of evolutionary problems as of many others. If Messrs. Butler and Shaw and Wells and the rest cannot be said to have made scientific contributions[Pg 238] of very great value, they have at least applied thoughtful, acute, suggestive analysis and stimulating conjecture in both religious and sociological lines.

The optimism of trained and professed scientists is, however, somewhat more serious and more important. From the advent of Darwin’s theory there have been those, like Asa Gray, who persisted in regarding it as perfectly, luminously compatible with entire orthodoxy. Gray himself maintained this position with militant energy, and Mivart, though far more critical of Darwin, contrived to reconcile the general principles of evolution with a long adherence to the Catholic Church. In our day Sir Oliver Lodge has reconciled a life of scientific research with spiritualistic beliefs, and even Darwin’s co-discoverer, Wallace, ardently advocated spiritualism to the end.

Others who are not quite so extreme in their conclusions, yet insist that there is no conflict whatever between a firm belief in Darwinism and a spiritual hope. Especially scientists of this type lay stress upon the benefits which enlightened scientific theory confers upon our life in this world. Evolution, according to them, teaches the splendid progress of man in the past and in the future, his[Pg 239] enriching development, his enlarging solidarity in well-being and well-doing. When one reads these almost ecstatic interpretations of scientific possibility, one finds it really difficult to resist their rapture. Listen to the enthusiasm of Professor Conklin: ‘The past and present tendencies of evolution justify the highest hopes for the future and inspire faith in the final culmination of this great law in

“One far-off divine event
Toward which the whole creation moves.”’[187]
The religion of the future is to be no worse than that of the past: who knows but it may be infinitely better? ‘In the past religion has dealt to a large extent with the individual and his relation to God; its chief concern was the salvation of individual souls and their preparation for a future life; it has been largely egocentric. The religion of the future must more and more deal with the salvation of society; it must be ethnocentric.’[188] In the charming words of Meilhac and Halévy:

‘C’est imprévu, mais c’est moral.
Ainsi finit la comédie.’[189]
‘Unexpectedly moral at that,
It closes the comedy pat.’
To be sure, there are persons to whom all this ecstasy seems more gorgeous than substantial. I[Pg 240] cannot help thinking of the bitter comment of Leopardi on the sciolists who were busily engaged in making a happy whole out of wretched component parts: ‘The lofty spirits of my day found out a new and almost divine scheme: not being able to make any one person happy, they forgot individuals and set themselves to making the community happy as a whole.’[190] And he concludes,

‘I know not whether to pity or to smile.’[191]
I confess that I am myself perfectly, enormously egocentric, and these ethno considerations appeal to me very little. In so far as the good of the race is identified with my personal comfort and well-being, I am interested in it. But my ego cries out for God simply for itself, and if it is to vanish like a dewdrop in the sun, words cannot express my utter indifference to the well-being of the race, of the world, and of the universe.

Nevertheless, it is probable that humanity will achieve some adjustment in this matter. Mankind has always demanded spiritual ideals and the divine presence, and always will demand them. If they are lost, it will re-invent them. If they are destroyed, it will re-create them. No doubt the speculations of the philosophers, the merry doings of the clergy, and the persistent optimism of the[Pg 241] scientists will suffice to keep religion and the human soul and even God upon Their feet and to enable Them to carry on decorously through the dreamy flight of centuries to come.

IV
Meantime, it is interesting to consider how many of the great spirits of the last generation, and especially of those most intellectually influential, were profoundly moved by Darwinism and felt more or less its haunting gloom of destruction and its far-reaching effect. In Ibsen the struggle for existence shows itself in the intense assertion of the individual and his passionate emphasis of the right to live and develop himself, and the same tendency in Nietzsche grew into the cloudy and colossal phantom of the Superman. With Tolstoi the obsession of Darwinistic conflict and survival appears in the earlier novels, ‘Anna’ and ‘War and Peace,’ but in the end, like Zola or John Fiske, he found the pressure too great and too horrible, and endeavored to establish an antidote for human misery in human love. In Renan the subtle, delicate, enchanting irony serves only to make the fundamental, dissolving nihilism more deep and ruinous. As he expressed it, through the dramatic characters who[Pg 242] are merely his mouthpiece: ‘Uncertain as we are about human destiny, the wisest course is to see to it that in making all sorts of hypotheses, one at least avoids being too absurd’;[192] again: ‘Though the universe should prove not serious, science might be serious still. Vast sums of virtue have been expended on chimæras. It is better to take the more virtuous course, even though one may not be sure that virtue is more than a word.’[193] Or our own American Henry Adams asks evolution to educate him, and asks in vain. All it can teach him is that terebratula can remain unchanged in its insignificance for centuries, while man evolves, yet in the end proves to be no whit more significant than terebratula. And Adams goes out, like a spent torch, uneducated, in the huge, unmeaning, whirling acceleration of theories and discoveries and plain sufferings and questions that must remain forever unanswered. Yet perhaps Adams was quite as adequate to the universe as Dr. Cadman.

There are, especially, two figures, not so important for the quality of their thought, but immensely important for the influence of it, who stand out as being overweighted and overcome by the evolutionary blight. Anatole France, following Renan, filled his books and his life with gentle, indulgent,[Pg 243] kindly tolerance, with rare human insight and sympathy. Yet beneath it all, beneath the lenient tenderness of Sylvestre Bonnard, and the kindly curiosity of Jérôme Coignard, and the patient comprehension of Monsieur Bergeret, always there was the sense of the nullity of human effort and the futility of human fate. All the motives and interests of men and women are reduced to the Darwinian residuum of self-preservation and propagation, or as France repeatedly puts it, more boldly and baldly, love and hunger are the two poles of our being. And when he makes intimate confession of the workings of the theory in his own person and life, this is the result: ‘It is said, “Man is the lord of creation.” Man is the lord of suffering, my friend. There is no clearer proof of the non-existence of God than life.... If you could read in my soul, you would be terrified.... There is not in all the universe a creature more unhappy than I. People think me happy. I have never been happy for one day, not for a single hour.’[104]

Or take the case of Mark Twain, far more important for Americans than Anatole France, because it may safely be said that few if any authors more influenced and to-day influence the youth of America than the creator of Huckleberry Finn.[Pg 244] Mark, like France, was the kindest, the gentlest, the most humane of men and writers. His energetic sympathy and support were given to relieve suffering and oppression everywhere. But although he was not particularly expert in science or philosophy, the plague of utter nihilistic disbelief had infected his soul as completely as that of France, and far more militantly. The destructive effect of the evolutionary teaching cannot be more fully displayed than in the arguments which Mark, to save his own credit, puts into the mouth of Satan in ‘The Mysterious Stranger’: ‘A God ... who mouths justice and invented hell—mouths mercy and invented hell—mouths Golden Rules, and forgiveness multiplied by seventy times seven, and invented hell; who mouths morals to other people and has none himself; who frowns upon crimes, yet commits them all; who created man without invitation, then tries to shuffle the responsibility for man’s acts upon man, instead of honorably placing it where it belongs, upon himself; and finally, with altogether divine obtuseness, invites this poor, abused slave to worship him!’[105]

In conclusion, perhaps one may introduce oneself, not in the least as connected with all these distinguished persons, but simply as a type of a great[Pg 245] number of average human beings, who live and suffer and have to fight their way somehow through the blinding mist of years and tears. When I was sixteen, I read the ‘Origin,’ and I think the impression it produced has never been obliterated. It is not, it has never been, the maintenance of any deliberate philosophical theory. I am too utterly without intellectual training or equipment even to form such a thing. It is not any aggressive or militant agnosticism. It is simply a feeling of utter insignificance in face of the unapprehended processes of nature, such as Leopardi expresses with bare intensity: ‘Nature in all her workings has other things to think of than our good or ill.’[106] It is a sense of being aimlessly adrift in the vast universe of consciousness, among an infinity of other atoms, all struggling desperately to assert their own existence at the expense of all the others.

Apparently this sense of struggle among individuals, struggle everywhere, among theories and beliefs, as well as living creatures, does not affect every one with the same oppression of distress. There are natures so healthily constituted that they have the mere joy of adventure in it, and can go on forever elbowing their way through the crowd of other nothings with the splendid affirmation of[Pg 246] their individuality in the conflict. If it is a question of theories, they can say with Professor Whitehead: ‘A clash of doctrines is not a disaster; it is an opportunity.’ If it is a case of more material strife, they can disguise it with the ameliorations of the social instinct, or such substantial optimism as sustained President Eliot through his ninety years in the view that the joy of life is in ‘contest without conflict.’

More infirm, more frail, more doubting tempers may not take it so. There is the weary horror of endless multiplicity, sweeping from eternity to eternity. There is the embodiment of the universe in one individual, and yet the sense that that individual is more fragile than the universe itself, the sense that reduces all life and all one is to a mere shifting maze and complication of fleeting sensations, held together by the vaguest gauze of memory, and liable to be scattered and disseminated at any moment by the slightest shock. No doubt the corrective for such a dissolving terror is to live intensely in one’s own personality, without thinking of it, to emphasize every moment instinctively the huge importance of one’s ego, which if it has its way is at all times adequate to fill the endless spaces of the universe and crowd out the major stars. But for[Pg 247] some of us such emphasis is difficult to accomplish, and instead, when one is thoroughly penetrated by the evolutionary attitude, one is too apt to find oneself more insignificant than terebratula, because one is conscious of one’s own insignificance and terebratula is not.

And it was Darwin, the gentle, the kindly, the human, who could not bear the sight of blood, who raged against the cruelty of vivisection and slavery, who detested suffering in men or animals, it was Darwin who at least typified the rigorous logic that wrecked the universe for me and for millions of others.

[Pg 248]

CHAPTER VII
DARWIN: THE SCIENTIFIC SPIRIT
I
Independently of his actual scientific work and discoveries, Darwin is in so many respects one of the finest types of the scientific spirit, that it seems natural to conclude a study of him with a summary of the most important elements of that spirit, its admirable and broadly valuable qualities and its limitations, as illustrated in Darwin himself and in others as compared with him.


CHARLES DARWIN
About 1854

The basis and fundamental motive of the scientific spirit is simply and naturally curiosity, the endless and often merely wayward desire to know and to find out facts, of all sorts. When the mind begins to shake itself clear of the immediate, engrossing pressure of mere subsistence, its first impulse is to learn something about the surrounding universe and about itself. And this impulse is not solely for utility, for the immense practical advantage which such knowledge evidently brings with it. There is the instinct of occupation and distraction, the effort to escape ennui and idleness and to fill one’s thoughts with outward diversity that they may not [Pg 249]be dragged and weighed down by one’s own particular cares and troubles. There is the instinct of emulation, the desire to excel others in knowledge, if one cannot in wealth, or in success of practical achievement.

These are the motives of the collector, and in a sense the scientist is a collector of facts, as others collect coins, or stamps, or china, or old furniture. The impelling motives of curiosity and excellence are much the same. There are people who gather and assort clippings from the newspapers, for the mere collecting instinct of it, gather them on all sorts of subjects, with the scientist’s obscure impulse to accumulate knowledge even if they do not use it.

We are too apt to associate science exclusively with the study of nature, and in this way the thought of the scientific spirit is altogether too much restricted. Its real field is as vast as that of human interests, and scientific methods and scientific purposes apply as much to philology, to history, to religion, to the general movements of human society, as to the curious consideration of animals and plants and stones and chemical elements.

But if mere curiosity is to become truly scientific, it must be broadened and deepened into research.[Pg 250] That is, the simple collection of facts must be systematized by a definite object and method. The mere garnering of one fact and another here and there, though it often has its great and singular charm, is apt to degenerate into aimlessness and futility. It must be guided and solidified by the sense of working toward some particular conclusion which will give all the facts coherence and significance. In other words, the relation of the facts must be studied, as well as the facts themselves, they must be coördinated and subordinated, till their real depth of meaning is revealed. How nicely does Darwin indicate the proportionate connection between theory and observation in the following passage: ‘Let theory guide your observations, but till your reputation is well established, be sparing in publishing theory. It makes persons doubt your observations.’[127]

Two of the supreme elements of research are completeness and correctness. It is true that final completeness can rarely be obtained in this world, but the important thing is to aim at it, to leave no stone unturned, no nook unsearched, to gather every possible fact from every possible source, before one allows oneself to deduce positive conclusions, or conclusions that even approach positiveness.[Pg 251] And besides the completeness, one should test one’s position from every aspect, to insure its being, so far as possible, correct. No one but the trained scientific thinker appreciates thoroughly the vast possibility of error, or is sufficiently aware how apt error is to intrude its subtle and treacherous working into the most careful investigations and the most logically buttressed theories. In one of his immensely suggestive casual phrases Darwin remarks, ‘The history of error is quite unimportant.’[128] This may be true enough as regards the abstract progress of science, but assuredly the history of error is of the highest interest to the curious student of the human mind.

But neither curiosity nor even the ardor of research will go very far, unless backed up by a habit of enormous and persistent industry. It is not the showy spurts that count, the bursts of application for a few weeks or months. It is the long, assiduous unbroken labor, such as thousands of scientists are giving in hundreds of laboratories, without prospect of distinction, without hope of immediate reward, simply from pure love of the work itself. And this toil is expended not only on the practical inventions, which are expected to produce comparatively quick and often astonishing commercial[Pg 252] results, but on pure science, abstract investigation of speculative problems, which even if solved, will not change the practical conditions of life in the slightest degree. Although Darwin sometimes questioned the wisdom of spending so many years on his petty barnacles, he knew that the work was immensely valuable to him in the pure discipline of labor. At any rate it taught him a profound and sincere respect for those who were doing such work steadily, cheerfully, unendingly, without looking to anything else whatever: ‘He would never allow a depreciatory remark to pass unchallenged on the poorest class of scientific workers, provided that their work was honest, and good of its kind.’[129]

There are times when labor is attractive, when you feel like it and like nothing else, and are ready to plunge into it with a furious zeal. There are other times when you are dispirited and discouraged, when the labor seems worthless and the effort impossible, or when you have a sheer desire to drop it altogether and go play. Sir Walter Scott, one of the great workers of the world, tells us that if any one set him a task to do, even agreeable in itself, the result immediately was an unbounded desire to do something else. The real spirit of industry shows in sticking through these periods of[Pg 253] discouragement and distraction, and the worker who accomplishes is he who does not heed them. It is one of the striking things about Darwin that he kept up work all his life in this spirit, in spite of all limitations and obstacles, and as a pure amateur in the best sense of the word. It is true that he himself points out what a benefit it was to him not to be professionally tied to any duties: ‘If I had any regular duties, like you and Hooker, I should do nothing in science.’[130] But it is also true that few men with plenty of money, with plenty of temptation to amusement of every sort, would have stuck to their chosen work with the ardor and also the long, persistent system, which Darwin kept up to the end.

For patience is as necessary to the true scientist as industry. When you think you are getting new facts, discoveries that will startle the world and perhaps affect the practical living of millions, there is a natural impulse to proclaim them, there is haste, eagerness, the desire for reward, for recognition, for material success. Or, there is the fear of anticipation, that some one else may be working on the same lines, and get in before you, and all your glory will be taken away. These considerations must be banished altogether. The slow, deliberate[Pg 254] processes of nature must be accepted and awaited. If it takes years to develop the experiments that will, or that even may, lead to the desired results, then you must accept the years, unhurrying, unworrying, with the assurance that the work will be done in the end and that it makes no difference to the world or to the future, whether it is done by you or by another.

And with the patience goes caution, the determination not to state results until you have confirmed them, not to overstate or give them forms that are misleading. In practical life, the necessity of acting at once often makes caution a dangerous luxury, and those who hesitate and debate too long are apt to arrive too late or not at all. A certain amount of chance and hazard must be taken and accepted. But the beauty of these larger intellectual realms of scientific thought is that you can wait calmly till all doubt and error are eliminated. The lesson of moderation is hard to learn. The best and the most careful never feel that they have learned it thoroughly: ‘The subject has begun to interest me to an extraordinary degree,’ says Darwin; ‘but I must try not to fall into my common error of being too speculative. But a drunkard might as well say he would drink a little and not[Pg 255] too much.’[131] And elsewhere, after years had weighted his work with the teachings of experience, he sums up what seems to him one of the supreme needs of science, if not the supreme need: ‘Forgive me for suggesting one caution; as Demosthenes said, “Action, action, action,” was the soul of eloquence, so is caution almost the soul of science.’[132]

Also, when you are testing so widely and carefully, and making sure of your foothold before every step you take, you come to realize the vast possibilities of different points of view. The one thing that the true scientist dreads is fixity, positiveness. Nature is forever mobile and flexible, and those who would follow nature and study her and interpret her must welcome and imitate her flexibility. They must be at all times ready to recognize the different aspects and phases of the same fact or group of facts, and willing to accept different conclusions with the changing and shifting light in which the facts are viewed. As Professor Whitehead puts it, admirably: ‘Science is even more changeable than theology. No man of science could subscribe without qualification to Galileo’s beliefs, or to Newton’s beliefs, or to all his own scientific beliefs of ten years ago.’[133] As I read in an[Pg 256] excellent article in a field of scientific research very different from Darwin’s, that of philology and the emendation of classical texts: ‘In emending these passages we should adopt Pasteur’s method of investigation—exhaust every combination which it is possible for the mind of man to conceive.’[134]

This impartiality, this breadth of view, this readiness to consider, if not to accept, all conjectures and all theories, is comparatively easy, when one is indifferent. If the motive of one’s investigation is mere curiosity, and one has no doctrine to establish, no thesis to defend, open-mindedness is facile and natural. But the scientific man instinctively forms theories, and when once a theory is formed, there comes the human impulse to maintain it, and to consider only those arguments and even those facts that will bear one out. As we have seen, it is here almost more than anywhere that Darwin’s example is of abiding value. No man could be more attached to a theory than he was to his. Yet he was determined, so far as human nature is capable of it, to keep his mind open and not to let his preconceptions color his observation or his reasoning. Huxley’s statement of the matter is indisputably correct when he speaks of Darwin’s ‘sagacity, his untiring search after the knowledge of[Pg 257] fact, his readiness always to give up a preconceived opinion to that which was demonstrably true.’[135] And Darwin, in another of his simple, striking phrases, condenses all that open-mindedness means, and the difficulty of it and the rarity (italics mine): ‘If you argue about the non-acceptance of Natural Selection, it seems to me a very striking fact that the Newtonian theory of gravitation, which seems to every one now so certain and plain, was rejected by a man so extraordinarily able as Leibnitz. The truth will not penetrate a preoccupied mind.’[136]

Finally, among these more impersonal elements of the scientific spirit, a high place should be accorded to the quality of being ready to admit one’s ignorance. In this age of universal ignorance, most people who think are more or less aware of their deficiency, but as we are naturally more appreciative of our own lack than of that of others, the first impulse is a desperate effort to conceal it. Perhaps of all states of mind one of the most hostile to the scientific spirit and most incompatible with it, is pedantry, and one of the most essential elements of pedantry is precisely this disposition to conceal one’s ignorance, to make the most determined attempt to hide from others the fact that we are as helpless and as groping and as uncertain as[Pg 258] they are. This is apt to be the vice of the teaching profession, though so many teachers are gloriously exempt from it. The pedagogue is inclined to think, I believe quite wrongly, that if he once lets his scholars see that there is anything he does not know, they will lose confidence in him forever, whereas nothing establishes their confidence so much as to appreciate his willingness to enter into their difficulties and to admit that the difficulties are human and his own.

At any rate, the true man of science begins by admitting the vastness of the regions that he has not entered and can never enter, the illimitable fields of knowledge that he has not the time or the training to explore. And no man was ever more notable in this admission than Darwin. There is the general recognition of the limits of human knowledge and human capacity for knowledge: ‘The more one thinks, the more one feels the hopeless immensity of man’s ignorance.’[137] There is the recognition of the hardening of the mental arteries, so to speak, by which our flexibility is so greatly impaired and against which we cannot guard enough: ‘nearly all men past a moderate age, either in actual years or in mind, are, I am fully convinced, incapable of looking at facts under a new point of[Pg 259] view.’[138] Further, there is not only the sense of general intellectual impotence, but the admission that, even in one’s own special line, there is much that one must necessarily miss, much that must, if not invalidate one’s conclusions, at least render them dubious and incline one to the extremest modesty in asserting them. No doubt the peculiar nature of Darwin’s work, which obliged him to touch upon all sorts of very different scientific fields, accentuated this modesty of attitude, but no one can question that it was inborn: ‘There are so many valid and weighty arguments against my notions, that you, or any one, if you wish, on the other side, will easily persuade yourself that I am wholly in error, and no doubt I am in part in error, perhaps wholly so, though I cannot see the blindness of my ways.’[139] When one goes after the truth in that spirit, one is much more likely to find it, and at any rate to teach the world valuable lessons, whether one finds it or not.

II
Now to consider the more personal qualities of the scientific spirit, that is those that affect human relations. Naturally it is not pretended that all scientific men have these personal qualities, any[Pg 260] more than the qualities already indicated. Men of science are human like the rest of us, and eminently liable to the weaknesses that the rest of us have. Sometimes even they seem more liable, perhaps because the impersonality of their occupation makes the personal weaknesses stand out. But such weaknesses are obviously not a result of the scientific spirit, but obtain in spite of it, and its higher tendency should be to diminish or restrain them.

It is interesting, in this personal and human connection, to see how the scientific qualities develop into virtues to some extent akin to the Christian ideal. For example, the recognition and admission of ignorance, on which we have been insisting, must carry with it, should carry with it, the eminently Christian virtue of humility. When you are oppressively aware how little you know, how far your information is from being adequate and your conclusions from being final, it is impossible to maintain a spirit of arrogance or self-assertion. You turn to others for their agreement and support, in the tone of Goethe’s remark that he felt immensely strengthened in a conclusion if he found that even one other human being agreed with him. Or, as Darwin puts it: ‘Though I, of course, believe[Pg 261] in the truth of my own doctrine, I suspect that no belief is vivid until shared by others.’[140] The truly scientific worker should be ready to defer to the opinion of his fellow-workers and instantly to surrender his own when convinced that theirs is based upon wider observation or more valid arguments.

Closely connected with humility is tolerance, and this virtue also flows from the admission of ignorance almost as a necessity. If you appreciate your limitations and that your knowledge is as incomplete as your deductions are hazardous, you will be at all times ready to recognize that others may be right and you may be wrong, and you will have a gentle forbearance toward even what appear to be their errors. ‘True science necessarily carries tolerance with it,’ says Voltaire.[141]

To be sure, the mention of Voltaire in connection with tolerance rather makes one smile, for if he fought for tolerance as for other things, he fought hard and bitterly, and he was always fighting for something. And in general it may well be urged that the history of scientific thought shows anything but tolerance and gentleness. Indeed it sometimes seems as if scientists were a peculiarly waspish and petulant generation, apt to fly out, and to fly at, with what to the ordinary mind hardly[Pg 262] appears sufficient excuse. Darwin himself appreciates this unfortunate tendency, and frequently deplores it: ‘How strange, funny, and disgraceful that nearly all ... our great men are in quarrels in couplets.’[142]

But here again, it is human nature, in its inborn weakness and self-satisfaction, that does the quarreling, and the scientific spirit, taken in itself, certainly tends to quiet and lenify. In one of his very latest letters Darwin wrote: ‘You have shown how a man may differ from another in the most decided manner, and yet express his difference with the most perfect courtesy. Not a few English and German naturalists might learn a useful lesson from your example; for the coarse language often used by scientific men towards each other does no good and only degrades science.’[143] But it is difficult for humanity to learn, and when it is learned to remember, the profound truth expressed in the saying of Edmond Scherer in regard to tolerance: ‘The fundamental dogma of intolerance is that there are dogmas, that of tolerance is that there are only opinions.’

And tolerance, the mere recognition that others may be right and we wrong, even as to our most cherished theories, when it is enlightened by clearness[Pg 263] of intelligence and warmed by sympathy, easily passes, as we have seen with Darwin in an earlier chapter, into that most delightful of all virtues, or more properly that root of all virtues, the power and the instinct of putting ourselves in others’ places, of entering into their lives. It is not quite enough to respect others’ opinions, or even to defer to them. One should go further, and endeavor to understand how they arrive at them, and to do this, one should be ever alive to the vast community of human nature, and the infinite threads and strands that bind together our hearts and the hearts of even those who appear most different from us. It is this power of comprehension, this effort at comprehension, of others’ point of view, which leads to the wonderful gentleness of tone that makes a great part of Darwin’s charm: ‘You are mistaken in thinking that I ever said you were wrong on any point. All that I meant was that on certain points, and these very doubtful points, I was inclined to differ from you.’[144] It is evident that in arguing, in discussing, Darwin always sought to understand his adversary’s position, and in order to do this, to put himself entirely in his adversary’s place.

The nature of science in itself tends to foster and[Pg 264] encourage this disposition to enter into the lives of others, because by its abstract character and its larger aims and interests it inclines to reduce as much as possible the elements of self, and of self-interest and self-assertion. Indeed, here again it is curious to see how, when the pursuit of scientific truth rises to its highest intensity and white heat of ardor, it brings about a sort of self-abnegation, which approaches and suggests the mystical self-abandonment of Christian ecstasy. He shall leave all and follow me, says religion. And we have seen something of the same spirit in Darwin’s apparently colder declaration that the man of science should have neither wife nor child, but a heart of stone, and a brain altogether free for the vast, abstract researches which make the whole of his life.

There is indeed something almost religious in the passion with which the true scientist casts aside all personal considerations, often all considerations of comfort and ease and indolent enjoyment, in the absorbing effort to attain the pure truth which he is seeking. With what intensity of delight does one fling an old delusion behind him. As Darwin puts it: ‘To kill an error is as good a service as, and sometimes even better than, the establishing of a new truth or fact.’[145] With what rapture does one become[Pg 265] aware of the progress of scientific thought: ‘How grand is the onward rush of science; it is enough to console us for the many errors which we have committed, and for our efforts being overlaid and forgotten in the mass of new facts and new views which are daily turning up.’[146]

It is needless to say that thousands of others besides Darwin are infected with this rapture, and to quite the same or an even greater degree. In the dawn of scientific thought we have Lucretius, than whom none was ever more ardent, exulting in his passionate effort to dart the beams of intellectual day through the swirling, smothering mist of error and delusion. Or again, in our own time we have such excitement as is described by Pasteur, so nearly the correlative of Darwin in many ways, when he feels himself to be on the brink of discovery: ‘I was so happy that I was overcome by a nervous trembling that made it impossible for me to bring my vision again to the polarizing apparatus.’[147]

So the pursuit of pure truth, and the giving one’s life to the achievement of it, elevates, and clarifies, and chastens, almost like the pursuit of virtue, and the two tend even to merge in one another, as in Goethe’s noble saying: ‘The real love of truth[Pg 266] shows itself in this, that one knows how to find and cherish the good everywhere.’ Or to conclude with another of Darwin’s sentences, all the more impressive for its simplicity and restraint: ‘For myself I would however, take higher ground, for I believe there exists, and I feel within me, an instinct for truth, or knowledge, or discovery, of something the same nature as the instinct of virtue and our having such an instinct is reason enough for scientific researches without any practical results ever ensuing from them.’[148]

III
It seems to be of interest to consider one or two types of the scientific spirit in lines quite different from Darwin’s. There is Sainte-Beuve, to whom I have referred in earlier chapters. The great French critic was almost exactly contemporary with Darwin, being born in 1803 and dying in 1870. I do not discover that he ever mentions Darwin’s books, though he must have known something of them. In any case, he typifies admirably many of the scientific methods and qualities, the vast curiosity, the research, the labor, the patience, the passion for seeing all sides and allowing for all points of view. Only, he was concerned, not with plants and[Pg 267] animals, not with the material, evolutionary world, but with the subtle phases and motives and passions and developments of the human spirit. He studied human life and character with endless curiosity and the results of his study are embodied in the forty volumes of portraits and in the seven solid volumes of the History of the Monastery of Port Royal, one of the most profound and searching investigations of religious psychology that has ever been made. Sainte-Beuve himself liked to compare his work with the researches of the more specific scientists. I have quoted earlier his brief statement: ‘I analyze, I herborize, I am a naturalist of souls.’[149] And elsewhere he puts it more elaborately, ‘It is absolutely as in botany for plants and in zoology for the species of animals. There is a moral natural history, with a method (as yet hardly developed), of the natural families of souls.’[150] And he loved to analyze souls of all sorts, good and bad, strong and weak, happy and unhappy, to analyze them and compare them and classify them, and bring out in them the profound common elements of human nature, under the endless play and diversity of the superficial differences.

It is peculiarly interesting to watch in Sainte-Beuve, as in Darwin, the working and the complication[Pg 268] of the scientific spirit with the more personal elements. Sainte-Beuve made much more definite assertion than Darwin did, of sacrificing and effacing the personal life for scientific purposes. The Frenchman boasted that he mingled with all sorts of groups and associated himself with all sorts of causes and experiences, not from devotion to the things themselves, but from pure curiosity and from the passion for analyzing the working of these causes in human minds. He carried this so far that he was often accused of disloyalty to his friends and of espousing causes and then deserting them, and he himself handles the defense of the subjective attitude in such a way as to give some justification for the charge. His life, his thought, his work, were perfectly impersonal, he said, and in consequence he was epigrammatically branded with betraying all truths for the sake of truth.

On the other hand, it is very evident that some personal elements lingered about him much more than he thought or admitted. His early ambition, his undying ambition, was to be a poet. As a poet he failed, at least made no popular or conspicuous success. He saw the ardent contemporaries and close associates of his youth, Hugo, Lamartine, Balzac, Sand, Musset, making great popular reputations,[Pg 269] while he was compelled to drag along in comparative shadow; and for all his boasted impersonality, this to a certain extent embittered him. The vast comprehension, the high intellectual impartiality, which distinguish him when he is dealing with the past, fail and shrink in a measure when he discusses contemporary work, and you cannot but feel that he is unconsciously hampered and tormented by a jealousy from which Darwin was wholly and nobly free.

But what marks Sainte-Beuve’s work most of all, as I have elsewhere emphasized, and what distinguishes him from Darwin and many other notable scientists, is the extraordinary concreteness of it. He had of course a vast background of general intellectual training and experience and of conversance with general thought and principles. But with this background always instinctively present, he devoted himself directly to the study of individuals. Only rarely does he deal in the discussion of theories of any sort, and then his handling is apt to be so complex and difficult that you feel him to be out of his element. What fascinates and absorbs him is the endless, close, minute, sympathetic study of individual men and women, and just because he is not hampered by theories, has no[Pg 270] ends to attain nor points to prove, the study is endlessly varied, flexible, mobile, adaptable, and profoundly, inexhaustibly human. The incessant, fruitful application of scientific method has never been better exemplified than in Sainte-Beuve’s work.

Or, to take another of the broader types of the scientific spirit, perhaps one of the noblest and most luminous that has ever existed, Goethe. Goethe was a half century older than Sainte-Beuve and Darwin, but he lived well down into their period and the clarity of nineteenth century scientific thinking could find no better example than he. His actual scientific work is far from contemptible, and he to some extent anticipated Darwin as to the possibilities of metamorphosis in the natural world. His speculations on the theory of light, in contradiction to those of Newton, show at least the active and energetic intelligence.

But Goethe’s value to the scientific spirit rests on far broader grounds than any mere detail of scientific research or experiment. No one cultivated or practiced more than he the attitude of vast, unprejudiced curiosity, of eager search and relish for pure truth, independent of all considerations of party, or consequence, or practical bearing. It is[Pg 271] this spiritual latitude which Matthew Arnold means when he calls Goethe the greatest poet of his own time and the greatest critic of all times. The free, broad, ample, mobile working of the human intelligence has never found a more lucid exponent than Goethe, and everywhere through his writings there are passages which will help the lover of truth, while the distilled essence of his mental attitude is to be found in the collection of ‘Maximen und Reflexionen,’ which gives the kernel of wisdom without the somewhat otiose Teutonic wrapping of amplification in which Goethe was often inclined to envelop it.

It is in the highest degree curious, remembering the weaknesses of Sainte-Beuve to which I have already alluded, to read all his numerous comments on Goethe, but particularly the following: ‘Goethe understood everything in the universe—everything except perhaps two things, the Christian and the hero. There was a weakness here which belonged to the realm of heart. It seems likely that he considered Leonidas and Pascal, the latter especially, as monstrosities in the order of nature.’[151] And Sainte-Beuve prided himself upon understanding the Christian and the hero both, and it is probable that he did.

[Pg 272]

The interesting point in Goethe, and also in less degree in Sainte-Beuve, as compared with Darwin, is that the full development of the scientific spirit in both of them did not exercise the same sort of spiritual blight with which Darwin thought that it affected him. No human being ever lived who was more susceptible to beauty than Goethe was, and his passion for pure truth did not prevent his retaining the highest sense of artistic ecstasy through his whole long life. With him and with Sainte-Beuve both, it could hardly be said that thinking came before emotion, for both of them adored the incomparable beauty of form and the rapture that came with it up to the very end.

On the other hand, neither Goethe nor Sainte-Beuve is for a moment to be compared with Darwin in that ineffable sweetness and simple charm which endeared him to all who came into contact with him and which breathe everywhere through his letters and even his more formal scientific works.

One striking feature in Sainte-Beuve is that he recognized fully the absorbing, engrossing nature of the scientific spirit, yet appreciated that the pursuit of knowledge does not necessarily bring happiness. No one has expressed the barren desolation of mortal life with more acrid bitterness than he. Shakespeare[Pg 273] tells us that ripeness is all. Sainte-Beuve doubts whether it exists. ‘Ripen?’ he cries. ‘Ripen? We never ripen. We harden in some spots. We rot in others. We ripen never.’[152] Years bring with them—for him—an utter indifference to everything and everybody: ‘I have arrived in life at a complete indifference: provided I do something in the morning, and go somewhere at night, life has nothing more for me.’[153] And again, life is nothing but the pricking of one illusion after another, till one becomes bitterly convinced that no illusion is worth the pains of being pricked. As he sums it up in a vivid figure: ‘Why I no longer care for nature, for the country? Why I no longer care to walk in the little footpath? I know well that the footpath is the same, but there is no longer anything on the other side of the hedge. In old times there was rarely anything, but always there might be something.’[91]

It is true that Sainte-Beuve’s melancholy and disgust are closely connected, as he himself admits, with the gross sexual disorders of his celibate career, and he speaks of ‘the incurable disgust with everything which is peculiar to those who have abused the sources of life.’[92] In his later years he seems to have had no principle of sexual restraint[Pg 274] whatever, and to have indulged as freely in indiscriminate commercial amours as did Pepys or Aaron Burr, though he was as much without Burr’s gay oblivion as without Pepys’s touches of remorse. He proclaims as a cynical creed his method of seeking wisdom: ‘Like Solomon and like Epicurus, I have made my way to philosophy through pleasure. It is a better road than traveling thitherward by logic after Hegel’s or Spinoza’s fashion.’[93] And the sum of the philosophy was akin to Solomon’s. ‘Sainte-Beuve said to me,’ records Goncourt, ‘One should make the tour of everything and believe in nothing. There is nothing real but woman.’[94] Solomon would hardly have made the exception. The curious thing is that, with all this abandoned personal license, Sainte-Beuve, in his critical judgments, preserved the most delicate sensibility as to moral excellence in sexual lines, as in all others.

When we turn to Goethe, we find perhaps little more regard for sexual morals than with Sainte-Beuve, but at any rate a temperament far better poised, and to all appearances charged and glorified with luminous serenity. Yet with Goethe also the scientific spirit, even though enriched with the artist’s delight and the artist’s creative power, could not bring happiness in its train. The sorrows[Pg 275] and sufferings of Werther might perhaps be accredited to the extravagance of youth. But in extreme old age we hear Goethe proclaiming the emptiness and misery of life in terms almost as bitter and complete as those of Sainte-Beuve or of Anatole France. ‘I will say nothing,’ he said to Eckermann, ‘against the course of my existence. But at bottom it has been nothing but pain and burden, and I can affirm that during the whole of my 75 years I have not had four weeks of genuine well-being. It is but the perpetual rolling of a rock that must be raised up again forever.’[95]

So far as we know, Darwin had no sexual cause of spiritual disturbance, and his scientific pursuits obviously brought him interest and delight. But we have seen how much even Darwin complained that absorption in science stunted and atrophied the higher sides of the spiritual nature. Work was largely a means of forgetting life, and when work failed, Down cemetery became singularly attractive. The pursuit of truth for itself, exciting and engrossing as it may be, would seem to have something abnormal and unwholesome about it and Pascal’s consolation for the reedlike insignificance of man in the thought that he is a ‘thinking reed’ sounds a little chill and comfortless, even with[Pg 276] Scherer’s amplification about the glory of ‘the dream that knows itself to be a dream, of thought that thinks itself.’ The final emptiness and futility which at times appear to attach to the profoundest search for truth have never been more grandly stated than in the words with which Sainte-Beuve brings his vast history of Port Royal to a close: ‘I have been and I am only an investigator, a sincere observer, attentive and scrupulous.... I have been after my fashion a man of truth, so far as I have been able to attain it. But how little is the best we can attain! How bounded is our vision and how quickly it reaches its limit! It is like a pale torch lighted for a moment in the midst of an enormous night. And he who most had it at heart to know his subject, who had the keenest desire to grasp it, and the greatest pride in treating it, most feels himself impotent and below his task, on the day when, seeing it almost completed and the result obtained, the intoxication of power fails him, the final exhaustion and the inevitable disgust overwhelm him, and he perceives that he too is but an illusion the most fleeting on the breast of the Illusion which is infinite.’[Pg 277][96]

IV
And of course it is not contended that scientific men in general are unhappy, which would be absurd. On the contrary, it is probable that, with the infinite variety and solace of their pursuits, they are apt to be an unusually contented and cheerful class of men. There is the poignant saying of Voltaire, who was full of the scientific spirit as of most others: ‘Study consoles for everything.’[97] And Montesquieu expresses it more generally: ‘I have never had a sorrow which a half hour of reading would not dissipate,’ and again, with more specific elaboration: ‘The love of study is almost the sole passion that is eternal in us; all the others fail as this miserable machine which sustains them falls more and more into decay.’[98]

Yet for the mass of mankind assuredly the scientific spirit and the pure pursuit of truth are not enough, and the abstract thought of them leaves a void which only persistent, concentrated action can fill up. We are living, moving, acting creatures, and for most of us knowing, thinking, except as a means to living, is inadequate, infertile, and essentially provocative of discontent. As Sterne’s Yorick expresses it, in his homely, pointed fashion: ‘I think the procreation of children as[Pg 278] beneficial to the world as the finding out the longitude.’[99] ‘I’ll do and I’ll do and I’ll do,’ cries the witch in ‘Macbeth.’ It is the natural, universal, prevailing cry of humanity, doing, doing, doing, till the end—and then, what? It skills not to inquire.

And there is the further point, that not only too much abstract knowing does not help for doing: it is apt to hinder. Especially, the scientific virtue of the recognition of ignorance is far from being a benefit in practical life. The best of doing, the best of action is undoubtedly instinctive, flows by quick, unapprehended, processes out of the vast subconscious accumulated storehouse of our being. The supreme illustration of this is the achievement of the athlete. Watch the complicated action of the highly skilled baseball-player. A dozen intricate related movements are accomplished with sure, unfailing speed, any one of which would be utterly dislocated and thrown out of adjustment by the slightest attempt to analyze it on the part of the player, who is usually disinclined to such analysis precisely in the proportion of his practical skill.

And the same thing obtains to much the same extent in what might appear to be more intellectual lines of practical action. The soldier, the man of business, the statesman, all require no doubt immense[Pg 279] and competent detailed knowledge in their particular professions. But here also too great analysis, a too curious probing of motives and processes and alternatives and possibilities hurts rather than helps. The pure thinker is too often apt to cry out with Goethe’s horror: ‘There is nothing more frightful than active ignorance.’[100] Yet nine tenths of the work of the world is done, sometimes efficiently, sometimes haltingly, but done, by active ignorance, and could not be done otherwise. The thinker, the profound analyst, debates, hesitates, falters, and too often accomplishes nothing.

It may be that, not only in the realm of muscular effort, but in all practical action, the best results are obtained by comparatively instinctive methods. Yet it is evident that deliberate conscious reasoning is an important instrument in the work of the man of affairs. Also, reason, the enchainment of thoughts through elaborate logical processes, is the chief agent of the scientific spirit. In an earlier chapter we have analyzed the dangers and betrayals of reason. But the greatest betrayal of all is when reason turns upon itself and devotes its brilliant, magnificent powers to self-dissection, instead of to accomplishment in the practical world.[Pg 280] The extreme illustrations are in such minds as Sénancour, Maine de Biran, Amiel, men naturally equipped for the performance of great things, but in whom the force of genius is paralyzed by the perpetual introspective consideration of the means and methods by which genius operates. As Amiel expresses it: ‘I also feel at times the mad rage for life, the desperate impulse to seize happiness, but much more often a complete prostration and a silent despair. And whence comes this? From doubt of my own reason, of myself, of men, of life, from doubt which enervates the will and destroys the powers, which makes one forget God, forget prayer, forget duty, from unquiet and corrosive doubt, which renders existence impossible, and makes a ghastly mock of hope.’[101]

Perhaps reason offers the most curious of all the antinomies or self-contradictions which arise when one seeks to develop the physical, mental, and moral nature of man, on an evolutionary basis, from the fundamental instinct of self-preservation. A lesser but striking form of this self-contradiction is, for example, the habit of thrift, which is naturally explained as a tendency of self-protection, yet in its sordid extremes may work to destroy life rather than prolong it. Or, again, there are the[Pg 281] strange contradictions involved in the social instinct. As one sees it in the insects, or in the gregarious grouping of the lower animals, the self-preservational basis is obvious enough, and with a few wrenches of excusable ingenuity one may put all human affections and devotions on the same foundation. Yet in the end one arrives at the astonishing paradox that the instinct of self-preservation has developed devotion to others so that a man may be willing to lay down his life for his friend, or even for those who are not his friends. But the extreme of all these contradictions, if one accepts the evolutionary development of reason, is that that marvelous instrument should be produced for the preservation of the individual and yet that the final working of it should be to show how utterly insignificant, pitiable, and unworthy of preservation this very individual is.

Another weakness of the scientific spirit, and the curse of its passion for truth, is the difficulty, not to say the impossibility of ever attaining it. In the detail of scientific research this is, perhaps, not an evil, and difficulty is merely a splendid spur and stimulus to ever renewed effort and achievement. But when it comes to profounder and more fundamental matters, the difficulty is more serious, and[Pg 282] if it may be justly said that one wearies of everything except to understand, one wearies of the failure to understand more than of anything else. After all, there are but two things that it is really important to know: oneself and God. And it is precisely in regard to these that the impossibility of final knowledge most overwhelms us. In the rugged language of old Ben Jonson: ‘I know no disease of the soul but ignorance; not of the arts and sciences, but of itself.’[102] And a Greek, two thousand years before Ben Jonson, gave vivid utterance to the same sufficiently obvious idea: ‘Many things are obscure to man, but the most obscure of all is his own soul.’[103]

It is precisely in this impossibility of attaining truth in the ultimate things that the Fundamentalists find their justification for the attempt to control the search for it. ‘You tell us,’ they say, ‘that everything must yield to the search for truth. You undermine secure, established morals and traditions in the name of truth. Then truth slips away from you and in the end you can offer us nothing but a shadow and a dream. Accepted convention is at least a solid basis for living. You have nothing solid to offer us, for any purpose, anywhere.’ And the argument would have some validity, if the[Pg 283] inborn movements of great nature could ever be stopped by laws or legislatures or Fundamentalists.

But, after all, the value of ignorance, or at least of the knowledge of ignorance, which goes with the scientific spirit, lies in the charming qualities that I have indicated earlier in this chapter, tolerance, patience, humility, gentleness. Only, to produce these qualities, the recognition of ignorance must not be aggressive, combative. Fifty years ago such recognition was erected into a dogmatic religion called Agnosticism, the triumphant, militant assertion that no man knew anything about the fundamental verities and no man could, and this dogmatism was even more exasperating than other dogmatisms, because it purported to be based on an attitude essentially undogmatic. The true, the fruitful, the profitable recognition of ignorance is not dogmatic or assertive at all. It is purely personal, begins and stops with my ignorance only, and lets your ignorance altogether alone. This is peculiarly true and important in the age of ignorance in which we live, the age which has piled up general knowledge with such vast celerity of accumulation that no individual can pretend to grasp more than a very small portion of it. And all we can any of us say is, I do not know. You[Pg 284] may know, he may know, especially as he thinks he does, which goes so vastly far, but I, I, I, alas, do not.

Agnosticism is too violent a word for this purely personal and infinitely humble ignorance. Scepticism even is too proud a word, too philosophical a word. Yet scepticism, if used with caution, may perhaps serve, for want of a better. But there is one thing about scepticism too often forgotten. Universal doubt surely carries with it the privilege of universal hope. The professed sceptic is too apt to be critical and cynical, to use his doubt simply to upset the certainties of other people, and to rest always in the darker side of possibility. But if anything may be true, surely the beautiful may be true, the good, the joyous, the lovable, as well as the gloomy and despondent.

And if the privilege of scepticism is hope, the essence of it is questioning and questing. There is a doubt which, in its despair of ultimate truth, is content to trifle, to beguile the misery of life with jest and play and momentary diversion. Or there is the doubt in deeper matters which, as with Darwin, turns to eager, assiduous investigation of the mere, fascinating detail of the external world. But there is also a doubt which lives in passionate, perpetual earnestness and the unfailing, unyielding,[Pg 285] indomitable effort to find out God, being assured that without Him the universe, with all its splendor and all its endless evolving glory, is nothing, merely nothing. Such doubt will express itself in words like those of the modern poet:

‘Day and night I wander widely through the wilderness of thought,
Catching dainty things of fancy most reluctant to be caught.
Shining tangles leading nowhere I persistently unravel,
Tread strange paths of meditation very intricate to travel.
Gleaming bits of quaint desire tempt my steps beyond the decent.
I confound old solid glory with publicity too recent.
But my one unchanged obsession, whereso’er my feet have trod,
Is a keen, enormous, haunting, never-sated thirst for God.’
THE END

[Pg 287]

BOOKS BY DARWIN, WITH THE ABBREVIATIONS USED IN REFERRING TO THEM IN THE NOTES
The American revised edition is referred to, unless otherwise specified

A Monograph on the sub-class Cirripedia.—The Balanidæ—The Verrucidæ.	Cirripedia.
The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex.	Descent.
The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of the Same Species.	Different Forms of Flowers.
The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom.	Cross and Self Fertilization.
Krause, Ernst, Erasmus Darwin (translated from the German by W. S. Dallas, with a preliminary notice by Charles Darwin).	Krause.
The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.	Expression.
The Formation of Vegetable Mould through the Action of Worms.	Worms.
Geological Observations.	Geological Observations.
Insectivorous Plants.	Insectivorous Plants.
Journal of Researches into the Natural History and Geology of the Countries Visited during the Voyage of H.M.S. Beagle Round the World.	Beagle Journal.
More Letters of Charles Darwin, two volumes.	More Letters.
The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants.	Climbing Plants.
The Origin of Species.	Origin.
The Power of Movement in Plants.	Movement in Plants.
The Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication, two volumes.	Animals and Plants.
The Various Contrivances by which Orchids are Fertilized by Insects.	Orchids.
[Pg 288]

BOOKS BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL MOST FREQUENTLY REFERRED TO IN THE NOTES, WITH THE ABBREVIATIONS USED
Aristotle, Historia Animalium, translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson.	Historia Animalium.
Castle, W. E., Genetics and Eugenics.	Genetics and Eugenics.
Conklin, Edwin Grant, The Direction of Human Evolution.	Evolution.
Darwin, Emma, A Century of Family Letters, two volumes.	Family Letters.
Darwin, The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, two volumes.	Life.
De Vries, Hugo, Species and Varieties, Their Origin by Mutation.	Species and Varieties.
Goncourts, Edmond et Jules, Journal des Goncourts, nine volumes.	Goncourts, Journal.
Gray, Asa, Letters of, edited by Jane Loring Gray, two volumes.	Gray Letters.
Grant Duff, Sir Mountstuart E., Notes from a Diary, fourteen volumes, 1851-1901.	Grant Duff.
Huxley, Thomas H., Darwiniana (the second volume of Collected Essays).	Darwiniana.
Huxley, Thomas H., Life and Letters of, by his son Leonard, two volumes.	Huxley, Life.
Lull Richard, Harry Burr Ferris, George Howard Parker, James Rowland Angell, Albert Galloway Keller, Edwin Grant Conklin, The Evolution of Man.	Lull.
Morgan, Thomas Hunt, Evolution and Adaptation.	Evolution and Adaptation.
Osborn, Henry Fairfield, The Earth Speaks to Bryan.	The Earth Speaks.
Osborn, From the Greeks to Darwin.	Greeks to Darwin.[Pg 289]
Osborn, Henry Fairfield, Impressions of Great Naturalists.	Great Naturalists.
Parker, George Howard, What Evolution Is.	What Evolution Is.
Pearson, Karl, The Grammar of Science.	Grammar of Science.
Thoreau, Henry, Journal, fourteen volumes.	Journal.
Vallery-Radot, Pasteur.	Vallery-Radot, Pasteur.
Wallace, Alfred Russell, My Life, two volumes.	Wallace, Life.
Whitehead, Alfred North, Science and the Modern World.	Science and the Modern World.
[Pg 291]

NOTES
CHAPTER I: THE OBSERVER
[1]Journal des Goncourts, May 1, 1857, vol. i, p. 182.

[2]Ben Jonson, The Poetaster, act ii, scene 1.

[3]Sentimental Journey, ‘In the Street.’

[4]Portraits Littéraires, vol. iii, p. 546.

[5]Expression, p. 80.

[6]Thoreau, Journal, vol. vii, p. 46.

[7]Gray, to Darwin, May 18, 1862, Gray, Letters, vol. ii, p. 481.

[8]Great Naturalists, p. 51.

[9]More Letters, vol. i, p. 72.

[10]Life, vol. i, p. 83.

[11]To Farrar, November 26, 1868, Life, vol. ii, p. 453.

[12]To Hooker, 1867, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 6.

[13]To Lyell, June 1, 1867, Life, vol. ii, p. 248.

[14]To Wilson, April 29, 1878, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 421.

[15]To Galton, November, 1879, Life, vol. ii, p. 414.

[16]To Lyell, March 17, 1863, Life, vol. ii, p. 201.

[17]To Galton, November 8, 1872, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 108.

[18]Expression, p. 184.

[19]To Dr. Ogle, March 12, 1871, Life, vol. ii, p. 321.

[20]More Letters, vol. i, p. 4.

[21]To Jenyns, October 17, 1846, Life, vol. i, p. 396.

[22]Beagle Journal, p. 282.

[23]To Gray, June 3, 1874, Life, vol. ii, p. 457.

[24]To Hooker, December 11, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 148.

[25]To Scott, July 2, 1863, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 323.

[26]To Horner, January, 1847, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 224.

[27]Expression, p. 12.

[28]Life, vol. ii, p. 238.

[29]More Letters, vol. ii, p. 105.

[30]Life, vol. i, p. 40.

[31]Different Forms of Flowers, p. 189.

[32]To Wiesner, October 4, 1881, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 432.

[Pg 292]

[33]Life, vol. i, p. 124.

[34]Ibid.

[35]Life, vol. i, p. 125.

[36]Life, vol. ii, p. 453.

[37]Cirripedia, p. 155.

[38]To Lyell, September 12, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 133.

[39]Darwiniana, p. 275.

[40]To Hooker, February 4, 1861, Life, vol. ii, p. 153.

[41]To Lyell, March 9, 1850, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 229.

[42]Life, vol. i, p. 125.

[43]Life, vol. i, p. 105.

[44]Life, vol. i, p. 80.

[45]Life, vol. i, p. 121.

[46]Purgatorio, canto iii.

[47]To Miss S. Darwin, August 4, 1836, Life, vol. i, p. 237.

[48]To Hooker, 1847, Life, vol. i, p. 317.

[49]More Letters, vol. i, p. 3.

[50]To Miss C. Darwin, November 8, 1834, Life, vol. i, p. 230.

[51]Beagle Journal, p. 78.

[52]Life, vol. i, p. 109.

[53]Expression, p. 194.

[54]To Romanes, May 29, 1876, More Letters, vol. i, p. 364.

[55]To Fox, May, 1832, Life, vol. i, p. 206.

[56]To Henslow, May 18, 1832, Life, vol. i, p. 208.

[57]To Henslow, August 15, 1832, More Letters, vol. i, p. 9.

[58]Journal, August 29, 1858, vol. xi, p. 137.

[59]Journal, December 4, 1856, vol. ix, p. 158.

[60]Life, vol. i, p. 368.

[61]Worms, p. 97.

[62]Origin, p. 105.

[63]In Popular Science Monthly, April, 1909, vol. lxxiv, p. 198.

CHAPTER II: THE THINKER
[64]To Bates, November 22, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 176.

[65]To Fawcett, September 18, 1861, More Letters, vol. i, p. 195.

[66]More Letters, vol. i, p. 93.

[Pg 293]

[67]Life, vol. i, p. 40.

[68]Answer to questionnaire, Life, vol. ii, p. 355.

[69]Life of Huxley, vol. i, p. 521.

[70]To Wallace, August 28, 1872, Life, vol. ii, p. 346.

[71]To Balfour, September 4, 1880, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 424.

[72]Beagle Journal, p. 378.

[73]To Wallace, December 22, 1857, Life, vol. i, p. 465.

[74]Journal, March 23, 1853, vol. v, p. 45.

[75]Gray to Canby, July 14, 1874, Gray, Letters, vol. ii, p. 649.

[76]Gray to Darwin, July 21, 1863, Gray, Letters, vol. ii, p. 509.

[77]Life, vol. i, p. 79.

[78]To Fox, March 24, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 506.

[79]Life, vol. i, p. 83.

[80]To Hooker, February, 1846, More Letters, vol. i, p. 56.

[81]To Wallace, February 26, 1867, Life, vol. ii, p. 276.

[82]Grammar of Science, p. 38.

[83]To Huxley, December 2, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 147.

[84]To Hooker, November 15, 1855, More Letters, vol. i, p. 84.

[85]To Gray, November 29, 1859, More Letters, vol. i, p. 126.

[86]Beagle Journal, p. 443.

[87]Life, vol. i, p. 83.

[88]Thiselton Dyer, in Life, vol. ii, p. 431.

[89]To Gray, 1857, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 252.

[90]To Hooker, January 11, 1844, More Letters, vol. i, p. 39.

[91]To Wallace, May 1, 1857, Life, vol. i, p. 454.

[92]To Carpenter, November 19, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 19.

[93]To Huxley, May 27, 1865, Life, vol. ii, p. 228.

[94]Aristotle, Historia Animalium, Book i, chapter vi.

[95]Life, vol. i, p. 126.

[96]To Hooker, April 14, 1855, Life, vol. i, p. 415.

[97]To Hooker, March 26, 1863, More Letters, vol. i, p. 474.

[98]Genetics and Eugenics, p. 181.

[99]De Vries, Species and Varieties, p. 769.

[100]Different Forms of Flowers, p. 156.

[101]To Gray, April 3, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 90.

[102]Zur Naturwissenschaft, Einzelne Betrachtungen und Aphorismen, section iii.

[Pg 294]

[103]Life, vol. i, p. 121.

[104]To Wiesner, October 25, 1881, Life, vol. ii, p. 510.

[105]Life, vol. i, p. 122.

[106]Orchids, p. 208.

[107]To Huxley, November 27, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 75.

[108]Insectivorous Plants, p. 154.

[109]To Gray, June 8, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 153.

[110]Huxley to Romanes, May 9, 1882, Life of Huxley, vol. ii, p. 42.

[111]Huxley to Foster, February 14, 1888, Life of Huxley, vol. ii, p. 203.

[112]Huxley to Hooker, March 9, 1888, Life of Huxley, vol. ii, p. 204.

[113]Darwiniana, p. 287.

[114]Alexander Agassiz to Gibbs, December 15, 1897, in G. R. Agassiz, Letters and Recollections of Alexander Agassiz, p. 333.

[115]J. J. Stevenson, in Popular Science Monthly, April, 1909, vol. lxxiv, p. 353.

[116]October 2, 1879, Life, vol. ii, p. 360.

[117]May 5, 1881, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 198.

[118]Descent, p. 606.

[119]September 23, 1868, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 85.

[120]August 19, 1868, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 84.

[121]To Wallace, April 30, 1868, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 77.

[122]To Huxley, June 12, 1867, More Letters, vol. i, p. 281.

[123]Animals and Plants, vol. ii, p. 396.

[124]Animals and Plants, vol. ii, p. 399.

[125]Life, vol. i, p. 75.

[126]August Weisman, The Evolution Theory (translation Thomson), vol. i, p. 242.

[127]Darwiniana, p. 20.

[128]To Hooker, January 20, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 499.

[129]Life, vol. i, p. 77.

[130]Vallery-Radot, Pasteur, p. 139.

[131]Life, vol. i, p. 71.

[132]To Lyell, September 20, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 521.

[133]Life, vol. i, p. 130.

[134]Life, vol. i, p. 117.

[135]July 2, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 116.

[Pg 295]

[136]To Lyell, August 1, 1845, Life, vol. i, p. 308.

[137]To Hooker, September 25, 1853, Life, vol. i, p. 400.

[138]Origin, p. 404.

[139]To Hooker, October, 1856, Life, vol. i, p. 443.

[140]To Henslow, Life, vol. i, p. 245.

[141]To Huxley, July 3, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 117.

[142]Life, vol. i, p. 72.

[143]To Lyell, October 1, 1861, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 191.

[144]Zur Naturwissenschaft, Einzelne Betrachtungen und Aphorismen, section iii.

[145]To Hooker, December 10, 1866, Life, vol. ii, p. 239.

[146]To Hooker, May 2, 1857, Life, vol. i, p. 454.

[147]Darwiniana, p. 246.

[148]To De Candolle, January 14, 1863, More Letters, vol. i, p. 234.

[149]To Hooker, April 1, 1864, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 330.

[150]To Hooker, April, 1857, Life, vol. i, p. 450.

[151]To Hooker, March 7, 1855, Life, vol. i, p. 405.

[152]To Hooker, July 30, 1856, Life, vol. i, p. 439.

[153]To Huxley, January 10, 1863, More Letters, vol. i, p. 231.

CHAPTER III: THE DISCOVERER
[154]Historia Animalium, book viii, chapter xxviii.

[155]Historia Animalium, book viii, chapter xxix.

[156]Beagle Journal, p. 216.

[157]To Hooker, January 11, 1844, Life, vol. i, p. 384.

[158]To Hooker, November, 1844, More Letters, vol. i, p. 43.

[159]To Lyell, October, 11, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 10.

[160]Greeks to Darwin, p. 156.

[161]Greeks to Darwin, p. 233.

[162]To Lyell, March 12, 1863, Life, vol. ii, p. 199.

[163]Marcus Herzog, introduction to Samuel Butler’s Unconscious Memory, p. xii.

[164]To Lyell, March 17, 1863, Life, vol. ii, p. 201.

[165]More Letters, vol. i, p. 37.

[166]MS. Journals, in Life, vol. i, p. 363.

[167]To Horace Darwin, December 15, 1871, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 207.

[Pg 296]

[168]P. 426.

[169]June 18, 1858, Life, vol. i, p. 473.

[170]To Lyell, June 25, 1858, Life, vol. i, p. 474.

[171]Hooker to Francis Darwin, Life, vol. i, p. 482.

[172]In Popular Science Monthly, April, 1909, vol. lxxiv, p. 396.

[173]To Wallace, April 20, 1870, Life, vol. ii, p. 301.

[174]Darwiniana, p. 286.

[175]Animals and Plants, vol. i, p. 225.

[176]Descent, p. 563.

[177]More Letters, vol. i, p. 2.

[178]Life, vol. i, p. 54.

[179]To Hooker, November 5, 1854, Life, vol. i, p. 404.

[180]To Hooker, July 13, 1858, Life, vol. i, p. 484.

[181]Life, vol. i, p. 46.

[182]To Fox, March 24, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 506.

[183]Life, vol. i, p. 55.

[184]Life, p. 71.

[185]In Life, vol. ii, p. 115.

[186]To Lyell, April 10, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 94.

[187]To Huxley, December 18, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 230.

[188]Great Naturalists, p. 70.

[189]Agassiz to Murray, December 2, 1887, G. R. Agassiz, Letters and Recollections of Alexander Agassiz, p. 228.

[190]To Falconer, January 5, 1863, More Letters, vol. i, p. 228.

[191]To Huxley, April 11, 1864, More Letters, vol. i, p. 246.

[192]To Henslow, October 26, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 174.

[193]To Wallace, July 12, 1871, Life, ii, p. 326.

[194]To Häckel, May 21, 1867, Life, vol. ii, p. 251.

[195]Huxley to Darwin, November 14, 1880, Life of Huxley, vol. ii, p. 15.

[196]To Hooker, December 25, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 46.

[197]Speech, November, 1877, Life of Huxley, vol. i, p. 514.

[198]P. 262.

[199]To Hooker, December 14, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 38.

[200]To Gray, April 3, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 91.

[201]To Henslow, May 8, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 149.

[202]Origin, p. 133.

[Pg 297]

[203]Origin, p. 143.

[204]Origin, p. 228.

[205]Origin, p. 233.

[206]Orchids, p. 257.

[207]To Huxley, May 11, 1880, More Letters, vol. i, p. 387.

[208]Darwiniana, p. 184.

[209]To Lyell, September 20, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 521.

[210]To Hooker, June 17, 1856, Life, vol. i, p. 432.

[211]To Falconer, October 1, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 206.

[212]Origin, p. 162.

[213]To Hooker, July 5, 1856, More Letters, vol. i, p. 93.

[214]To Miller, June 5, 1859, More Letters, vol. i, p. 122.

[215]To Hooker, June 30, 1862, Life, ii, p. 445.

[216]To Wallace, July 12, 1871, Life, vol. ii, p. 325.

[217]To Hooker, June 15, 1881, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 433.

[218]To Falconer, October 1, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 209.

[219]To Lyell, September 26, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 167.

[220]To Hooker, January 16, 1869, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 379.

[221]Evolution and Adaptation, p. 231.

[222]Greeks to Darwin, p. 229.

[223]November 7, 1875, More Letters, vol. i, p. 360.

[224]Descent, p. 61.

[225]In Life, vol. ii, p. 187, from Life of Kingsley, vol. ii, p. 171.

[226]To Hooker, April or May, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 512.

[227]To Gray, October, 1865, Life, vol. i, p. 489.

[228]Life, vol. i, p. 82.

[229]Greeks to Darwin, p. 5.

[230]Science and the Modern World, p. 158.

[231]What Evolution is, p. 17.

[232]Evolution, p. 16.

[233]The Earth Speaks, p. 19.

[234]Quoted in Boston Transcript review of translation of Weber’s History of Philosophy, February 6, 1926.

CHAPTER IV: THE LOSER
[235]To Hooker, October 13, 1858, Life, vol. i, p. 495.

[236]To Hooker, June 17, 1868, Life, vol. ii, p. 273.

[Pg 298]

[237]Life, vol. i, p. 81.

[238]Life, vol. i, p. 81.

[239]Life, vol. i, p. 30.

[240]To Lyell, January 22, 1865, Life, vol. ii, p. 216.

[241]To Morley, March 24, 1871, More Letters, vol. i, p. 326.

[242]Lull, p. 129.

[243]To Hooker, December 21, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 21.

[244]To Hooker, September 27, 1865, Life, vol. ii, p. 225.

[245]To Henslow, May 18, 1832, Life, vol. i, p. 220.

[246]Life, vol. ii, p. 356.

[247]To Herbert, June 2, 1833, Life, vol. i, p. 210.

[248]Reminiscences of Charles Darwin, in Harper’s Magazine, December, 1909, vol. cxx, p. 15.

[249]To Müller, August 28, 1870, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 92.

[250]Beagle Journal, p. 499.

[251]Life, vol. ii, p. 377.

[252]Descent of Man, p. 70.

[253]Life, vol. ii, p. 309.

[254]To Wallace, July 12, 1881, in Wallace, Life, vol. ii, p. 15.

[255]To Wallace, July 12, 1881, in Wallace, Life, vol. ii, p. 14.

[256]To Lyell, January 22, 1865, Life, vol. ii, p. 217.

[257]Krause, p. 70.

[258]Emma Wedgwood to Madame Sismondi, November 15, 1838, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 7.

[259]To Gurney, July 8, 1876, Life, vol. ii, p. 364.

[260]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 171.

[261]Life, vol. i, p. 103.

[262]Ibid.

[263]Beagle Journal, p. 112.

[264]Life, vol. i, p. 43.

[265]Life, vol. i, p. 42.

[266]To Susan Darwin, April 23, 1835, Life, vol. i, p. 233.

[267]Life, vol. i, p. 146.

[268]Life, vol. i, p. 42.

[269]Life, vol. i, p. 81.

[270]Life, vol. ii, p. 178.

[271]To Mrs. Haliburton, November 22, 1880, Life, vol. ii, p. 508.

[Pg 299]

[272]To Henslow, July 24, 1834, More Letters, vol. i, p. 14.

[273]To Hooker, March 17, 1867, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 2.

[274]To Rivers, December 28, 1866, Life, vol. ii, p. 241.

[275]Darwiniana, p. 286.

[276]Life, vol. i, p. 102.

[277]Life, vol. i, p. 81.

[278]Ibid.

[279]Life, vol. i, p. 57.

[280]Life, vol i, p. 81.

[281]E. B. Titchener, in Popular Science Monthly, January, 1909, vol. lxxiv, p. 47.

[282]Causeries du Lundi, vol. iv, p. 45.

[283]To Newton, May 3, 1780, The Correspondence of William Cowper (edition Wright), vol. i, p. 185.

[284]Poems (Globe edition), p. 191.

[285]Childe Harold, canto iii, stanza 72.

[286]Sénancour, Obermann, p. 40.

[287]Life, vol. i, p. 95.

[288]To Mrs. Darwin, April, 1858, Life, vol. i, p. 471.

[289]Beagle Journal, p. 322.

[290]To Henslow, August 15, 1832, More Letters, vol. i, p. 10.

[291]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 175.

[292]Mrs. Darwin to Darwin, 1859, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 175.

[293]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 201.

[294]Beagle Journal, p. 263.

[295]Life, vol. ii, p. 308.

[296]Ibid.

[297]Descent of Man, p. 612.

[298]Life, vol. ii, p. 238.

[299]Life, vol. ii, p. 237.

[300]William Darwin, in Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 169.

[301]Expression, p. 219.

[302]Beagle Journal, p. 411.

[303]Life, vol. i, p. 29.

[304]Life, vol. i, p. 282.

[305]To Lyell, September 3, 1874, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 237.

[306]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 253.

[Pg 300]

[307]To Ridley, November 28, 1878, Life, vol. ii, p. 412.

[308]To Gray, July, 1860, Life, vol. i, p. 284.

CHAPTER V: THE LOVER
[309]Norton to Ruskin, September 9, 1868, Letters of Charles Eliot Norton, vol. i, p. 309.

[310]Great Naturalists, p. 57.

[311]Reminiscences of Charles Darwin, in Harper’s Magazine, December, 1909, vol. cxx, p. 13.

[312]To Francis Darwin, November 11, 1887, The Life and Letters of Leslie Stephen, by Frederic William Maitland, p. 393.

[313]To Norton, Life of Stephen as above, p. 300.

[314]To Falconer, November 8, 1864, More Letters, vol. i, p. 257.

[315]Norton, Diary, April 12, 1873, in Letters of Charles Eliot Norton, vol. i, p. 477.

[316]Kingsley to Lubbock, in Life of Sir John Lubbock, Lord Avebury, by Horace G. Hutchinson, vol. i, p. 92.

[317]Grant Duff, Diary, 1873-1881, December 15, 1880, vol. ii, p. 283.

[318]July, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 159.

[319]September 5, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 205.

[320]To Hooker, April 23, 1861, More Letters, vol. i, p. 185.

[321]To Fox, March 13, 1837, Life, vol. i, p. 249.

[322]Life, vol. i, p. 42.

[323]Life, vol. i, p. 28.

[324]Life, vol. i, p. 49.

[325]Life, vol. i, p. 89.

[326]Life, vol. i, p. 30.

[327]Life, vol. i, p. 96.

[328]Answer to questionnaire, Life, vol. ii, p. 415.

[329]To Mrs. Darwin, March, 1842, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 69.

[330]To Fox, March 24, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 506.

[331]January 28, 1876, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 221.

[332]To Hooker, September 1, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 518.

[333]Life, vol. i, p. 85.

[334]To Falconer, November 14, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 211.

[Pg 301]

[335]To Hooker, May 29, 1854, More Letters, vol. i, p. 79.

[336]Life, vol. i, p. 243.

[337]Life, vol. i, p. 197.

[338]To Hooker, November, 1863, Life, vol. ii, p. 186.

[339]To Henslow, May 6, 1849, More Letters, vol. i, p. 66.

[340]Life, vol. i, p. 96.

[341]Diary, 1892-1895, August 6, 1892, vol. i, p. 80.

[342]Emma Wedgwood to Madame Sismondi, November 15, 1838, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 7.

[343]To Hooker, April 10, 1846, More Letters, vol. i, p. 416.

[344]To Murray, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 532.

[345]Life, vol. i, p. 99.

[346]Life, vol. i, p. 98.

[347]Life, vol. i, p. 99.

[348]Reminiscences, in Harper’s Magazine, December, 1909, vol. cxx, p. 17.

[349]Grant Duff, Diary, 1896-1901, vol. i, p. 307.

[350]Life, vol. i, p. 118.

[351]Life, vol. i, p. 115.

[352]Life, vol. i, p. 28.

[353]November, 1855, More Letters, vol. i, p. 87.

[354]To Hooker, September 27, 1865, Life, vol. ii, p. 223.

[355]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 118.

[356]January 20, 1839, More Letters, vol. i, p. 29.

[357]Ibid.

[358]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 48.

[359]September 5, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 204.

[360]More Letters, vol. i, p. 30.

[361]Ibid.

[362]Life, vol. i, p. 135.

[363]To Madame Sismondi, February, 1840, Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 51.

[364]Life, vol. i, p. 109.

[365]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 253.

[366]To Gray, July 23, 1862, More Letters, vol. i, p. 202.

[367]Diary of Thomas Moore, August 29, 1822, vol. iii, p. 367.

[368]Life, vol. i, p. 112.

[Pg 302]

[369]Life, p. 111.

[370]Life, vol. i, p. 115.

[371]Life, vol. i, p. 10.

[372]Life, vol. i, p. 76.

[373]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 44.

[374]December 18, 1861, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 281.

[375]To Wallace, February 27, 1868, More Letters, vol. i, p. 289.

[376]Life, vol. i, p. 115.

[377]Krause, p. 29.

[378]Life, vol. i, p. 31.

[379]Life, vol. i, p. 119.

[380]Life of Sir John Lubbock, Lord Avebury, by Horace G. Hutchinson, vol. i, p. 40.

[381]To Hooker, July 28, 1859, More Letters, vol. i, p. 126.

[382]To Hooker, April 14, 1855, Life, vol. i, p. 415.

[383]To Hooker, November 5, 1853, Life, vol. i, p. 356.

[384]September 11, 1859, Life, vol. i, p. 520.

[385]To Hooker, May 25, 1870, Life, vol. ii, p. 306.

[386]To Müller, June 21, 1881, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 369.

[387]Huxley to Mivart, November 12, 1885, Life of Huxley, vol. ii, p. 122.

[388]To Hooker, July 2, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 116.

CHAPTER VI: THE DESTROYER
[389]To Hooker, December 5, 1863, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 337.

[390]Life, vol. i, p. 279.

[391]Descent, p. 145.

[392]In Life, vol. ii, p. 245.

[393]To Hooker, July 13, 1856, More Letters, vol. i, p. 94.

[394]In Nature, 1882, vol. xxvi, p. 5, quoted in Encyclopædia Brittanica (edition 1884), Supplement, article Darwinism.

[395]Origin, p. 429.

[396]To Gray, September 17, 1861, Life, vol. ii, p. 170.

[397]To Hooker, March 29, 1863, Life, vol. ii, p. 202.

[398]Descent of Man, p. 121.

[399]Descent of Man, p. 612.

[Pg 303]

[400]Origin, p. 164.

[401]Descent of Man, p. 100.

[402]Life, vol. ii, p. 347.

[403]To Hooker, February 9, 1865, More Letters, vol. i, p. 260.

[404]To Lyell, August 21, 1861, More Letters, vol. i, p. 194.

[405]To Gray, May 22, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 105.

[406]Descent of Man, p. 612.

[407]Animals and Plants, vol. ii, p. 428.

[408]Family Letters, vol. ii, p. 196.

[409]To Scherzer, December 26, 1879, Life, vol. ii, p. 413.

[410]August Weisman, The Evolution Theory (Translation Thomson), vol. ii, p. 364.

[411]Address on Darwin Centenary, in Contemporary Review, July, 1909, vol. xcvi, p. 21.

[412]Herbert Spencer, An Autobiography, vol. ii, p. 548.

[413]The Earth Speaks, p. 63.

[414]In Boston Herald, June 3, 1926.

[415]Lull, p. 146.

[416]Saturday Review of Literature, editorial, May 29, 1926.

[417]Reverend Charles G. Finney, Memoirs, Written by Himself, p. 171.

[418]Jules Lemaître, Impressions de Théâtre, vol. iv, p. 114.

[419]Life, vol. ii, p. 239.

[420]Answers to Questions, in Boston Herald, January 4, 1926.

[421]To Hooker, January 19, 1865, More Letters, vol. i, p. 260.

[422]Evolution, p. 247.

[423]Conklin, Evolution, p. 240.

[424]La Grande Duchesse de Gérolstein, act iv, scene 3.

[425]Palinodia.

[426]La Ginestra.

[427]Ernest Renan, Drames Philosophiques, p. 174.

[428]Ernest Renan, Drames Philosophiques, p. 178.

[429]Anatole France Himself, by J. J. Brousson (translation Pollock), p. 71.

[430]The Mysterious Stranger, p. 150.

[431]Sopra un Basso Relievo Antico Sepolcrale.

[Pg 304]

CHAPTER VII: THE SCIENTIFIC SPIRIT
[432]To Scott, June 6, 1863, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 323.

[433]To Huxley, More Letters, vol. i, p. 125.

[434]Hooker on Darwin, Life, vol. i, p. 315.

[435]To Huxley, July 20, 1860, More Letters, vol. i, p. 158.

[436]To Günther, May 15, 1870, Life, vol. ii, p. 303.

[437]To Dohrn, January 4, 1870, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 444.

[438]Science and the Modern World, p. 255.

[439]Article by J. E. Harry, on the Helena of Euripides, in Journal of American Philology, October, 1925, vol. xlvi, p. 332.

[440]Speech at Royal Society Anniversary Dinner, 1894, Huxley, Life, vol. ii, p. 413.

[441]To Hooker, July 28, 1868, More Letters, vol. i, p. 305.

[442]To Farrar, August 28, 1881, More Letters, vol. i, p. 394.

[443]To Hooker, March 3, 1860, Life, vol. ii, p. 85.

[444]To Lubbock, November 12, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 14.

[445]To Carpenter, November 19, 1859, Life, vol. ii, p. 19.

[446]To Madame d’Epinay, July 6, 1766, Correspondance de Voltaire (edition 1881), vol. xii, p. 329.

[447]To Hooker, 1856, More Letters, vol. i, p. 90.

[448]To Wiesner, October 25, 1881, Life, vol. ii, p. 508.

[449]To Bentham, November 25, 1869, More Letters, vol. i, p. 379.

[450]To Wilson, March 5, 1879, More Letters, vol. ii, p. 422.

[451]Darwin to Wallace, August 8, 1872, Life, vol. ii, p. 348.

[452]Vallery-Radot, Pasteur, p. 22.

[453]To Henslow, April 1, 1848, More Letters, vol. i, p. 61.

[454]Portraits Littéraires, vol. iii, p. 546.

[455]Port-Royal, vol. i, p. 55.

[456]Causeries du Lundi, vol. ii, p. 268.

[457]Portraits Contemporains (1882), vol. v, p. 461.

[458]Portraits Littéraires, vol. iii, p. 543.

[459]Portraits Contemporains (1882), vol. v, p. 465.

[460]Portraits Contemporains (1882), vol. v, p. 464.

[461]Portraits Littéraires, vol. iii, p. 543.

[462]Journal des Goncourts, vol. ii, p. 134.

[Pg 305]

[463]Conversations with Eckermann, quoted in William James, Varieties of Religious Experience, p. 137.

[464]Port-Royal, vol. vi, p. 245.

[465]To Helvetius, January 5, 1740, Correspondance (edition 1881), vol. iii, p. 356.

[466]Quoted by Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du Lundi, vol. vii, p. 47.

[467]Tristram Shandy, Book vii, chapter xxxiii.

[468]Maximen und Reflexionen, chapter iii.

[469]Journal de Henri Frédéric Amiel, vol. i, p. 129.

[470]Discoveries, in Jonson’s Works (edition Cunningham), vol. iii, p. 401.

[471]Homeric Epigrams (edition Baumeister), v.

[Pg 307]

INDEX
Abstemiousness, D.’s, 182.
Accuracy, D. and, in observation, 21;
in statement, 22, 23;
mathematical, and instruments, 24;
his hobby, 59.
Achievement, motives, 96-99;
D.’s attitude, 99-101.
Adams, Henry, effect of evolution on, 242.
Æsthetics, observation in, 11;
D.’s attitude, 137;
effect of scientific spirit, 272, 275.
Agassiz, Alexander, on D.’s coral-reef theory, 65;
on D. and candor, 105.
Agassiz, Louis, and evolution, 103.
Agnosticism, as dogma, 283, 284.
Agriculture, revolution, 11.
Ambition, as trait, D. on it, 96.
Amiel, H. F., self-dissection, 280.
Animals, D.’s love, 135, 188.
Appearance, D.’s, 168.
Appreciation, D.’s trait, 79, 80;
element in scientific spirit, 263.
Architecture, D.’s attitude, 139.
Ardor, element in scientific spirit, 264.
Argument, D.’s attitude, 74.
Aristotle, on experiment, 56;
and evolution, 84.
Arnold, Matthew, on Goethe, 271.
Art, D.’s attitude, 138-40;
evolution and realism, 225.
Barnacles, D.’s study, 26.
Bates, H. W., and nature, 12.
Beagle, D.’s voyage, 4.
Bell, Thomas, and D., 173.
Bergson, Henri, and evolution, 235.
Bryce, Lord, on D. and Gladstone, 133;
on D.’s appearance, 168.
Buckle, H. T., D. on, 143.
Buffon, Comte de, and evolution, 84, 119.
Burbank, Luther, and experiment, 57;
and future life, 228.
Butler, Samuel, D.’s controversy, 108;
and religion and evolution, 237.
Byron, Lord, and nature, 152.
Candor, D.’s trait, 77-79, 105.
Castle, W. E., on experiment, 57.
Caution, element in scientific spirit, 245.
See also Deduction.
Chambers, Robert, and evolution, 84.
Children. See Family.
Civil War, D.’s interest, 134.
Collecting, D. and, 43.
Comparison, D.’s trait, 31.
Conklin, E. G., on natural selection, 125;
on evolution and religion, 239.
Conscience, activity of D.’s, 160.
Controversy, over evolution, 6;
D.’s attitude, 76, 77, 107.
Conversation, D.’s, 170.
Coolidge, Calvin, on politics and religion, 222.
[Pg 308]Copernicus, and orthodoxy, 209.
Coral reefs, D.’s theory, 64-66.
Correspondence, character of D.’s, 78, 145.
Cowper, William, and nature, 149, 150.
Creation, desire, 98.
Criticism, D.’s attitude, 104-17.
Cruelty, D.’s hatred, 135.
Curiosity, element of scientific spirit, 248, 249;
Sainte-Beuve and Goethe and, 268, 270.
Darwin, Charles R., influence, 3;
character, 3;
birth, 3;
ancestry, 3;
education, 4, 45;
interest in outdoor life and sport, 4, 174-76;
Beagle voyage, 4, 14;
marriage, home and children, family life, 4, 196-201;
invalidism, patience, 5, 36, 177-83, 193-95;
tomb, 6;
scientific observation, on it, 6, 14-16;
and self-analysis, 16;
study of expression, 17-19, 198;
promotion of observation by others, 19, 23;
accuracy, 21-24, 59;
and detail, 25;
industry and patience, 27-30, 252;
system, 30, 31, 183;
element of comparison, 31;
difficulties and discomforts of outdoor observation, 32-34;
sympathy, and observation, 34-36;
effect of physical limitations, 36, 37;
and collecting, 43;
and observation and deduction, 44-46, 250;
on Spencer, 47, 78;
and deduction and induction, 46-48;
mental power and activity, 48;
control over theorizing, 51, 54, 55, 115, 124;
on excessive theorizing, 52, 53, 254;
and experiment, 56-62;
exposition, style, caution, 62-64, 143-45, 212;
on coral reefs, 64-66;
on sexual selection, 66, 67;
on pangenesis, 68;
and metaphysics, 69;
doubt and self-criticism, 70, 71;
and objections and difficulties, 71, 72, 113-15;
and revision, 73, 118;
and argument, 74-76;
and controversy, 76, 107;
and mistakes, 77;
candor, 77-79, 105;
as correspondent, 78, 145;
appreciation and tolerance, 79, 80, 262, 263;
and ignorance and deceptive reasoning, 80-82;
and motives of achievement, 99-101;
Butler controversy, 108;
humility, 110, 258, 260;
success of books, 122;
fame, 126;
atrophy of other interests, 128-30, 272, 275;
and history, 130, 131;
and politics, 131-34;
and Civil War, 134;
and slavery, 134;
and animals, hatred of cruelty, 135, 188;
and vivisection, 136;
and social questions, 136, 137;
and æsthetics, 137-40;
and music, 140-42;
and fiction, 145;
and poetry, 146-48;
and natural beauty, 148, 153-56;
and religion and conscience, 156-63;
personal appearance, 168;
hospitality, 169;
conversation, 170-72;
fun, 172;
and society, 173, 178;
humanity, 176;
abstemiousness and indulgence, 182;
regimen, 183; finances, 184-86;
generosity, 186;
manner and temperament, 188;
and his father, 190; as fiancé, 190-92;
as husband, wife’s care, 192-94;
friendship and services, 201-07;
impartiality, 256;
on scientific ardor, 264;
[Pg 309]on love of truth, 266.
See also Evolution.
Darwin, Emma (Wedgwood), 4;
and theater, 139;
and D.’s religious attitude, 157;
D. as fiancé, 190-92,
and as husband, 192;
as wife, and D.’s invalidism, 193-96;
and D.’s theories, 218.
Darwin, Erasmus, 4;
and evolution, 84, 85;
controversy over biography, 108.
Deduction, observation and, 44-46;
and induction, 46-48;
D.’s attitude, 46, 47;
D.’s power, 48-50, 69;
his control over it, 51, 54, 55, 115, 124;
D. on excessive, 52, 53;
types of thinkers, 53-55;
experiment and, 55;
D. and experiment, 56-62;
D. and exposition, 62-64;
illustrations of his theorizing, 64-69;
D. and doubt, 70, 71;
D. and objections, 71, 72;
his trait of revision, 73;
D. and arguments, 74-77;
D. and mistakes, 77;
D. and deception in reason, 80-82, 115.
See also Observation; Scientific spirit.
Democracy, evolution and, 223.
Details, D. and, 25.
De Vries, Hugo, imitation theory, 124.
Discipline, D. and his children, 197.
Doubt, value, 70;
in D.’s logical processes, 70, 71;
aspects of agnosticism, 203-05.
See also Religion.
Drink, D. and, 182.
Earthworms, D.’s study, 21, 42, 151.
Education, D.’s, 4;
training in deduction, 45.
Eliot, C. W., effect of evolution on, 246.
Emerson, R. W., on evolution, 42, 234;
and nature, 151.
Empedocles, and evolution, 84.
Ethics, D. and morality, 160;
and evolution, 213-15, 219, 222, 231.
Evolution, idea and D.’s explanation of process, 4;
controversy, 6;
acceptance of principle, 6, 121, 125;
effect on study of natural history, 40-43;
as term, 83;
before Darwin, 83-85, 101, 233;
theory of inheritance of acquired characters, D. and, 85, 87;
D. and predecessors, 85-88;
beginning of D.’s interest, 88;
his development of theory of natural selection, 89-91;
his statement of theory, 91;
his realization of influence of theory, 92, 209-13;
his years of study and experiment, 92, 93;
Wallace and presentation of theory, 93, 94;
D. and Wallace, 94, 95;
Origin of Species, its effect, 96;
D.’s attitude toward, as achievement, 99-101, 122-24;
attacks by scientists, 102;
religious attacks, 103;
D. and attacks, 104-08;
D. and other workers, 109;
D. and difficulties, 111-17;
D.’s revisions, 118;
modification of theory, 119-21, 124;
promulgators, 121;
effect on theology, 209;
D.’s caution in statement, 212;
D. and ethical standards under theory, 213;
[Pg 310]D. and effect on belief, 215, 216;
D. and belief in God, 216-18;
and atheism, 218-20;
as typifying scientific influence on life, 221;
influence on politics, 222-25;
and realism, 225;
and hell and heaven, 227;
and popular belief in God and worship, 229, 230;
and substitute for sin, 231-33;
philosophical, 233-35;
clerical harmonizing with religion, 236;
Fundamentalists and, 237, 282;
scientific harmonizing, 237-39;
and individualism in religious belief, 239, 240;
future adjustment with religion, 240;
destructive spiritual effect, 241-47;
self-contradictions in reason, 280.
Experiment, D.’s devotion, 5, 56;
position, 55;
equipment, 57;
D.’s thoroughness, 58;
impersonality, 58;
accuracy, repetition, 59;
recording, errors and successes, 61.
Exposition, D.’s power, 62-64;
illustrations, 64-69.
Expression, D.’s study, 17-19.
Eye, and evolutionary theory, 112.
Fabre, J. H., and nature, 12.
Fame, as motive of achievement, 96-101.
Family, D. and father’s memory, 190;
D. as fiancé, 190-92;
husband and wife, 192-96;
children, training, 196-201;
their assistance, 200.
Farrer, Sir Thomas, on D.’s detailed observation, 26.
Fichte, J. H. von, and evolution, 233.
Fiction, D.’s attitude, 145.
Financial condition, D.’s, 184;
his attitude and care, 185;
his generosity, 186.
Finney, C. G., on revival, 230.
Fiske, John, and evolution, 122, 241.
France, Anatole, effect of evolution on, 242.
Friendship, D.’s trait, 201, 202;
his influence over friends, 202;
his dependence, 203;
his services to friends, 204-07.
Fun, D.’s trait, 172.
Fundamentalism, attacks on evolution, 103, 282;
ethical attitude, 232;
theological attitude, 237.
Gautier, Théophile, on observation, 7;
as poet, 11.
Generosity, D.’s trait, 186.
George, Henry D. and Progress and Poverty, 137.
Gladstone, W. E., and D., 133.
God, D.’s attitude, 164-67;
influence of evolution on belief, 216-18, 229;
thirst for, 285.
Goethe, J. W. von, on repetitions, 59;
on doubt, 70;
on mistakes, 77;
and evolution, 85;
and poetry, 148;
on love of truth, 265;
and scientific spirit, 270, 271;
pessimism, 274;
on active ignorance, 279.
Gould, George M., on D.’s invalidism, 180.
Grant Duff, Sir M. E., on D., 182.
Gray, Asa, on D.’s observation, 14;
on D. as thinker, 49;
relations with D., 110;
[Pg 311]and evolution, 121, 238.
Häckel, Ernst, and D., 110;
and evolution, 122;
atheism, 219.
Hartmann, K. R. E. von, and evolution, 233.
Hegel, G. W. F., type, 53;
and evolution, 233.
Hell, obsolete, 227.
History, D. and, 130, 131.
Homer, on self-ignorance, 282.
Hooker, Sir Joseph, on Darwin-Wallace paper, 94;
and D., 101, 110.
Hospitality, D.’s, 169.
Humanity, and study of natural history, 40-43, 136;
Sainte-Beuve’s study, 267, 268.
Humility, D.’s trait, 110;
and scientific spirit, 257-61.
Huxley, T. H., on D. and detailed observation, 26;
on D.’s industry, 27;
and induction, 46;
on D.’s mental processes, 62;
on D.’s candor, 79;
on effect of Origin of Species, 96;
and Bishop of Oxford’s attack, 103;
restraint of D., 108;
on D. and adverse suggestions, 115;
and promulgation of D.’s theory, 121;
on D.’s style, 144;
relations with D., 203-05;
on influence of D.’s appreciation, 206;
and religion, 219;
on D.’s impartiality, 256.
Ibsen, Henrik, effect of evolution on, 241.
Ignorance, realization and scientific spirit, 257, 283.
Imagination. See Deduction.
Immortality, D.’s attitude, 163;
effect of evolution, 215.
Impartiality, element in scientific spirit, 255;
Sainte-Beuve and, 268.
Induction, and deduction, 46-48.
See also Deduction.
Industry, D.’s, 27;
element in scientific spirit, 251.
Inheritance of acquired characters, Lamarck’s theory, 85, 90;
D.’s attitude toward, 87, 119, 120.
Instruments, D.’s faith, 25.
Instinct in practical life, 278, 279.
Interests, absorption and atrophy, 128-30, 272.
Invalidism, D.’s, 5, 36, 177;
his attitude toward it, 178, 179, 194;
cause, 179-81;
Mrs. D.’s care, 193-96.
James, William, and evolution, 234.
Jeffries, Richard, and nature, 12.
Jonson, Ben, on observation, 7;
on self-ignorance, 282.
Kingsley, Charles, on evolutionary theory, 121;
on D.’s conversation, 171.
Knowledge, and observation, 38-40;
and wisdom, 44.
Krause, Ernst, biography of Erasmus Darwin, 108.
Lamarck, Jean de, evolutionary theory, 85, 90, 119, 120;
D.’s attitude, 86.
Land question, D. and, 136.
Leibnitz, Baron von, and gravity, 257.
Leopardi, Giacomo, pessimism, 238, 245.
[Pg 312]Literature, D.’s attitude, 143, 145-48;
D.’s style, 143-45;
effect of evolution, 225-27.
Linnæan Society, Darwin-Wallace paper, 94.
Lodge, Sir Oliver, and science and spiritualism, 238.
Love, D.’s valuation, 206.
See also Family; Friendship.
Lubbock, Sir John, on debt to D., 202.
Lucretius, type, 54;
scientific ardor, 265.
Lyell, Sir Charles, on controversy, 76;
and evolution, 84; and D., 101, 110;
on D. and ‘remorse,’ 211.
McDougall, William, on inheritance of acquired characters, 85.
Maine de Biran, self-dissection, 280.
Manner, D.’s, 188.
Marriage of cousins, D. and, 136.
Mendel, Gregor, experiments, 124.
Milton, John, D.’s appreciation, 146.
Missing links in evolutionary theory, 113.
Missionaries, D.’s attitude, 159.
Mistakes, D.’s attitude, 77.
Mivart, St. G. J., and evolution and religion, 238.
Montesquieu, on study, 277.
Moody, D. L., absorption of interest, 129;
and prayer, 162;
and God, 167;
and hell and heaven, 227, 228.
Moore, Thomas, on children, 196.
Morality. See Ethics.
Morgan, Lloyd, and evolution, 235.
Music, D.’s attitude, 140-42.
Native, utilitarian and æsthetic observation, 10-13;
D. and appreciation, 148, 153-56;
elements of enjoyment, 149-53.
Natural selection, D.’s term and theory, 5, 90;
modification of theory, 119-21, 124.
See also Evolution.
Neuter insects, and evolutionary theory, 113.
Nietzsche, F. W., effect of evolution on, 241.
Norton, C. E., on D., 168, 170.
Objections, in D.’s logical processes, 71.
Observation, D.’s scientific trait, 6, 14, 19-21;
as general trait, 6-8;
by women, 8;
exclusive, 8;
of humanity, 9, 267, 268;
of nature, change in character, 10;
ulterior, 11;
æsthetic, 11;
delight, 12, 38, 148-54;
Thoreau, 13;
D.’s comments, 15;
D.’s general trait, 16;
his study of expression, 17-19;
D. and accuracy, 21;
accuracy in statement, 22-24;
D. and information from others, 19, 23;
mathematical, and instruments, 24;
detailed, 25;
D.’s industry and patience, 27-29;
need of patience, 29;
system, 30, 31;
comparison, 31;
difficulties and discomforts, 32-34;
and sympathy, 34-36;
effect of D.’s physical limitations, 36, 37;
knowledge as aid, 38-40;
effect of evolution on, 40-43.
See also Deduction; Scientific spirit.
[Pg 313]Origin of Species, publication,
effect, 5, 96;
exposition, 63;
revisions, 73, 118;
success, 122.
Osborn, H. F., on D.’s observation, 14;
on D. and Lamarck, 87;
on D. and criticism, 105;
on D.’s change in attitude, 120;
on D.’s fame, 124;
on D.’s appearance, 168;
on ethical effect of evolution, 222.
Owen, Sir Richard, and evolution, 103, 107, 111.
Oxford, Bishop of, attack on evolution, 103.
Pangenesis, D.’s theory, 68.
Parker, G. H., on evolution, 125.
Pascal, Blaise, on man, 275.
Pasteur, Louis, and objections, 72;
scientific ardor, 265.
Patience, D.’s, 28;
element in scientific spirit, 29, 253.
Pearson, Karl, on D. and imagination, 51.
Pedantry, and scientific spirit, 257.
Perry, R. B., on evolution, 125.
Pessimism, and evolution, 233;
Sainte-Beuve’s, 272, 276;
Goethe’s, 274.
Philosophy, D. and self-analysis, 16;
D. and metaphysics, 69;
evolutionary, 233.
Poetry, D.’s attitude, 146-48;
Sainte-Beuve and, 268.
Politics, D. and, 131-33;
influence of evolution, 222.
Pragmatism, and evolution, 234.
Prayer, D.’s attitude, 161-63.
Primogeniture, D.’s attitude, 136.
Pugnacity, and scientific spirit, 261.
Realism, as fruit of evolution, 225.
Reason, and instinct, 277-79;
as agent of scientific spirit, 279;
evolutionary contradictions, 280, 282;
and attainment of truth, 281.
See also Deduction; Scientific spirit.
Religion, D.’s attitude, 156-67;
pre-Darwinian theology, 208;
and Copernicus’s speculations, 209;
theological effect of evolution, 209;
D.’s attitude toward effect, 209-13;
ethical standards under evolution, 213-15, 219;
evolution and belief in future life, 215, 216;
and belief in God, 216-18, 229;
and democracy, 223;
evolution and hell and heaven, 227, 228;
fundamentalism, 232, 237, 282;
clerical harmonizing with evolution, 236;
scientific harmonizing, 237-39;
egocentric versus ethnocentric, 239, 240;
persistence, 240;
thirst for God, 285.
Renan, J. E., effect of evolution on, 241.
Research, element in scientific spirit, 250.
Revision, D.’s trait, 73, 118;
element in scientific spirit, 255-57.
Royer-Collard, Paul, on facts, 44.
Ruskin, John, on vision of artists, 11.
St.-Hilaire, Auguste, and evolution, 85.
Sainte-Beuve, C. A., observation of humanity, 9, 267, 268;
type, 54;
on absorption of interest, 128;
and poetry, 148, 268;
and scientific spirit, 266-70;
[Pg 314]concreteness, 269;
on Goethe, 271;
pessimism and sexual immorality, 272-74, 76.
Schelling, F. W. J. von, and evolution, 233.
Scherer, Edmond, on tolerance, 262;
on man, 275.
Schopenhauer, Arthur, and evolution, 233.
Scientific spirit, motives of achievements, 96-101, 248, 249;
research, 250;
industry, 251-53;
patience, 253;
caution, 254;
flexibility and impartiality, 255;
lack of pedantry, 257-59;
and human nature, 259, 262;
humility, 260;
tolerance, 261;
and pugnacity, 261;
appreciation, 263;
ardor, 264;
illustrations: Sainte-Beuve, 266-70;
Goethe, 270, 271;
and spiritual blight, 272-76;
inadequacy, 277;
and instinctive action, 278, 279;
reason as agent, 279;
and self-dissection, 279;
and self-contradictions, 280;
and unattainable truth, 281-83;
and ignorance and hope, 283-85.
See also Deduction; Observation.
Scott, Sir Walter, industry, 252.
Sedgwick, Adam, and D., 205.
Self-dissection, as betrayal of scientific spirit, 279.
Sénancour, É. P. de, on nature, 153;
self-dissection, 280.
Sexual selection, D.’s theory, 66, 67.
Shakespeare, William, vitality, 126;
D.’s opinion, 147.
Shaw, G. B., and religion and evolution, 237.
Shelley, P. B., and nature, 152.
Sin, effect of evolution on belief, 231.
Slavery, D.’s antipathy, 134.
Smoking, D. and, 182.
Snuff, D.’s indulgence, 183.
Socialism, and evolution, 224.
Society, D. and, 173, 178.
Spencer, Herbert, and ‘survival of the fittest,’ 5, 91;
D. on, 47, 78;
type, 54;
and universal evolution, 121, 219.
Spinoza, Baruch, type, 53.
Spiritualism, and evolution, 238.
Sport, D.’s attitude, 174-76.
Statement, accuracy, 22-24.
Stephen, Leslie, on D., 169.
Sterne, Laurence, on observation, 7;
on doing, 277.
Study. See Observation.
Survival of the fittest. Spencer’s term, 5, 91.
Sympathy, and observation, 34-38.
System, D. and, 30, 183.
Theater, D.’s attitude, 139.
Theology. See Religion.
Thoreau, H. D., and observation of nature, 13;
on knowledge as aid to observation, 39;
and deduction, 48.
Thrift, self-contradiction, 280.
Tolerance, D.’s trait, 79, 80;
element in scientific spirit, 261-63.
Tolstoi, Leo, effect of evolution on, 241.
Torrey, Bradford, on observation, 8.
Truth, instinct as element in scientific spirit, 265, 275;
[Pg 315]Goethe’s characteristic, 270;
unattainable, 281-83;
ignorance and hope, 283-85.
Turner, Sir William, on D. and information, 24.
Twain, Mark, effect of evolution on, 243.
Vivisection, D.’s attitude, 136.
Voltaire, and tolerance, 261;
on study, 277.
Wallace, A. R., on collecting, 43;
and D.’s sexual-selection theory, 66, 67;
and presentation of evolutionary theory, 93, 94;
relations with D., 94, 95;
and spiritualism, 238.
Water cure, D.’s subjection to, 181.
Wedgwood, Emma, Mrs. Darwin, 4.
Weisman, August, on deduction, 70;
and evolution, 122, 218.
Wells, H. G., and religion and evolution, 237.
Westminster Abbey, D.’s tomb, 6.
White, Gilbert, and nature, 12.
Whitehead, A. N., on D.’s caution, 125;
and evolution, 235, 246;
on scientific flexibility, 255.
Wiesner, Julius, courtesy, 262.
Wisdom, and knowledge, 44.
See also Deduction.
Wordsworth, William, and nature, 151.
Zola, Émile, as realist, 226, 241.
Back Cover
Transcriber’s Notes
pg 120 Changed: excuses any earlier undue insistance
to: excuses any earlier undue insistence
pg 241 Changed: Nietsche grew into the cloudy and colossal phantom
to: Nietzsche grew into the cloudy and colossal phantom
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DARWIN ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The dramatic instinct in children
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: The dramatic instinct in children

Editor: Norman E. Richardson

Release date: May 20, 2023 [eBook #70812]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Abingdon Press, 1914

Credits: This file was produced from images generously made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DRAMATIC INSTINCT IN CHILDREN ***
Cover
THE
DRAMATIC INSTINCT
IN CHILDREN
AMERICAN HOME SERIES
NORMAN E. RICHARDSON, Editor

THE
DRAMATIC INSTINCT
IN CHILDREN

Prepared originally by

THE LITERARY STAFF
of the
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CHILD LIFE

FOURTH EDITION
(Revised)

Colophon
THE ABINGDON PRESS
NEW YORK CINCINNATI

Copyright 1914, by
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CHILD LIFE

INTRODUCTION
The development of the dramatic instinct in children is the special responsibility of parents. The public school and church school programs are gradually including dramatics and the teachers in many of these schools can go far in sharing this responsibility. But it is in the home where room and time, equipment and motive, suggestions and cooperating friends are found. Parental skill is revealed in helping a child to try on a new character or virtue as well as a new blouse or pair of shoes. Social and moral imagination in the child can be realized under the direct guidance of father or mother. Voyages are taken, investigations made, treasure islands discovered, animals subdued, robbers put to flight, the plans of sly Indians frustrated, and fierce battles waged by the child whose parent-teacher is versatile and imaginative. The dull, uninteresting parent, whose chief virtue is that of routine, long-faced fidelity, narrows his children’s world and correspondingly limits the range of their moral development.

What faith is to the adult the dramatic instinct is to the child: it is the substance, the substantial realization of things hoped for. It is the power to make things happen. It is the victory that overcomes the prosaic, saw-dust affairs of life.

If this pamphlet, carefully studied, helps parents to see and properly awaken the sleeping dramatic powers of their children and give them a new motive in guiding its various expressions, the purpose of the writers will have been realized.

Norman E. Richardson.

5
THE DRAMATIC INSTINCT IN CHILDREN[1]
[1] The material included in this pamphlet, together with other practical studies of the subject of play, is included in “A Manual of Play,” by Forbush, and published by Jacobs and Company.

“And sometimes for an hour or so
I watched my leaden soldiers go,
With different uniforms and drills,
Among the bed-clothes through the hills,
“And sometimes sent my ships in fleets,
All up and down among the sheets;
Or brought my trees and houses out
And planted cities all about.”
—Robert Louis Stevenson.
I. The Nature of the Dramatic Instinct—1. Its Expression in Early Childhood. 2. Its Expression in Middle Childhood. 3. Its Expression in Later Childhood.

II. Educational Value—1. The Moral Value of this Instinct. 2. Its Inspirational Value.

III. Summary—References.

I. The Nature of the Dramatic Instinct
THE dramatic instinct finds expression in the impulse to make playful use of the imagination. It is based on certain fundamental instincts of childhood—imitation, construction, and motor activity. Its expression has been called by Gesell “a vital spark of life dropped into the lap of formalism and routine.”

This impulse is found among the earliest and lowest races. In the individual it is felt from early childhood throughout life. If neglected, it may fade away in maturity until it is hardly noticed; but, if properly developed, it is one of the greatest sources of human joy and strength.

Imagination is said to be of two kinds—passive6 and active. Passive imagination is that which dominates all other mental factors, making them subordinate. Active imagination is that of which the individual himself takes charge. An illustration of passive imagination is daydreaming. Play and dramatics are examples of active imagination. Both have their place in a man’s life. Passive imagination enables the individual to transfigure commonplace circumstances or surroundings in the glamour of beauty and to forecast ideal situations yet to be. It thus fills the present with sunshine and the future with hope. Active imagination begins where passive imagination leaves off, and comes forth to play and work with actual materials or circumstances in an imaginative fashion, and sets about making the fanciful future actual.

With young persons under fourteen active imagination is uppermost. Says Stevenson: “We grown people can tell ourselves a story, give and take strokes until the bucklers ring, ride far and fast, marry, fall and die, all the while sitting quietly by the fire or lying prone in bed. This is exactly what a child cannot do, or does not do, at least, when he can find anything else. He works all with lay figures and such properties. When his story comes to the fighting, he must rise, get something by way of a sword and have a set-to with a piece of furniture, until he is out of breath. When he comes to ride with the king’s pardon, he must bestride a chair, which he will so hurry and belabor and on which he will so furiously demean himself that the messenger will arrive, if not bloody with spurring, at least fiery red with haste.”

W. W. Newell, in Games and Songs of American Children, says: “Observe a little girl who has attended her mother for an airing in some city park. The older person, quietly seated beside the footpath, is half absorbed in reverie; takes little notice of passers-by, or of neighboring sights or sounds, further than to cast an occasional glance, which may inform her of the child’s security. The other,7 left to her own devices, wanders contented within the limited scope, incessantly prattling to herself; now climbing an adjoining rock, now flitting like a bird from one side of the pathway to the other. Listen to her monologue, flowing as incessantly and musically as the bubbling of a spring; if you can catch enough to follow her thought, you will find a perpetual romance unfolding itself in her mind. Imaginary persons accompany her footsteps; the properties of a childish theatre exist in her fancy; she sustains a conversation in three or four characters.”

The expression of the dramatic instinct may be observed on every hand, not only among children, but grown-ups as well. It animates the group conversing on the street corner, arousing the observer to imagine what the topic of conversation may be. It also enlivens the drawing-room, thus helping to make the social function a success. His observation of it may well have stirred the poet to say, “The world’s a stage, and we are players all.” And as our parts on the world stage change with the changing years, so the expression of this instinct is different in each of the three periods of childhood.

Its Expression in Early Childhood
During very early childhood little folks express the dramatic instinct entirely by imitation. They imitate people, birds, animals, noises; they try to enter into every experience which is within their reach by gesture, speech, or repeated action. As Joseph Lee tells us, “The mind first learns things by getting inside them, by being what it studies.” The child’s imagination is not capable of creating new situations, it simply enables him to reproduce the actions of other people in familiar ones. He mirrors the world as he understands it. These expressions are entirely individualistic and usually unconscious.

8This endeavor to mirror and imitate the life about him is a most important means by which the child educates himself. Evidently, the more varied the life which he sees, the more variety will enter into his play, and the broader will be the child’s intelligence.

From three years to about six, the dramatic impulse expresses itself largely in the form of make-believe. The individual creates a play-self living in a play-world. He begins now and continues with increasing power to imitate the idea rather than the thing. The baby could imitate the gestures and tones of his father. A child in this period plays that he is a father. When playing with dolls or soldiers, the child of this era transforms not only the dolls or soldiers and the nursery into an imaginary world full of the people which the dolls or soldiers represent, but he transforms himself into the parent of the dolls or the captain of the soldiers.

The following list of the plays of the larger boys of a California kindergarten during their recreation period illustrates how the play-world enlarges by the time the child has reached his fourth or fifth year: October 24th, Policeman; 25th, Policeman and Hunters; 26th, Wild Horses, Hunters, and Salvation Army; 30th, Butcher and House; November 1st, Butcher, Jail; 2d, Hunting, Cars, Circus; 3d, Butcher, Band, Procession; 6th, Band, Ladder, Steamer and Circus; 7th, Ladder, played with as Steam-engine, and Circus-train; 8th, Ladder, played with as Pipe-organ, and then Wood-saw; 10th, Ladder, as a Steamer; 13th, Dragon; 14th, Wild Pig; 15th, Wild Hog; 16th, Wild Hog, Train, Indians; 17th, Wild Hog, Indians; 20th, Merry-go-round; 21st, Cars; 22d, Circus and Menagerie; 23d, Policeman; 24th, Cars; 28th, Horse; December 5th, Electric Light Men, Noah’s Ark; 6th, Electric Light Men, Circus; 7th, Wild Horse, Bear, Robbers and Policeman, Electric Launch, Steamer and Boats, Indians; 8th, Indians; 11th, Santa9 Claus, Wild Horse, Store, Street-watering Carts; 12th, Teams of Horses, Telephone.

This list of things that children can do without adult guidance may be helpful to some mother who is called upon to kindle the imagination of her young child by suggestions.

“Making believe,” says Stevenson, “is the gist of his whole life, and he cannot so much as take a walk except in character. I could not learn my alphabet without some suitable mise-en-scène, and had to act a business man in an office before I could sit down to my book.” And he gives this thoroughly boyish illustration from his own childhood: “When my cousin and I took our porridge of a morning, we had a device to enliven the course of the meal. He ate his with sugar, and explained it to be a country continually buried under snow. I took mine with milk, and explained it to be a country suffering gradual inundation. You can imagine us exchanging bulletins; how here an island was still unsubmerged, here a valley not yet covered with snow; what inventions were made; how his population lived in cabins on perches and traveled on stilts, and how mine was always in boats; how the interest grew furious, as the last corner of safe ground was cut off on all sides and grew smaller every moment; and how, in fine, the food was of altogether secondary importance, and might even have been nauseous, so long as we seasoned it with these dreams.”

In another place he says: “We need pickles nowadays to make Wednesday’s cold mutton please our Friday appetite; but I can remember the time when to call it red venison, and tell myself a hunter’s story, would have made it more palatable than the best of sauces. To a grown person cold mutton is cold mutton all the world over; not all the mythology ever invented by man will make it better or worse to him; the broad fact, the clamant world, of the mutton carries away before it such seductive figments. But for the child it still is possible to10 weave an enchantment from eatables; and, if he has but read of a dish in a storybook, it will be heavenly manna to him for a week.”

The thing that is behind this making-believe seems to be a certain hunger to realize life to its fullest. Sully gives this winsome anecdote to illustrate the realizing power of play: “One day two sisters said to one another, ‘Let us play being sisters.’ This might well sound insane enough to hasty ears; but is it not really eloquent? To me it suggests that the girls felt they were not realizing their sisterhood, enjoying all the possible sweets of it as they wanted to—perhaps there had been a quarrel and a supervening childish coldness. And they felt too that the way to get this more vivid sense of what they were, or ought to be, one to the other, was by playing the part, by acting a scene in which they would come close to one another in warm, sympathetic fellowship.”

This kind of play is individualistic at the beginning and gradually becomes social. By and by the little child wishes for comradeship. If he has no human companions, he usually engages in the pathetic make-believe of inventing an imaginary playmate, with whom he often lives continuously. This sort of expression is as ancient as it is universal. The toys with which children have rebuilt an ideal world have been discovered in the ruins of every buried city.

Children show this faculty of imagining themselves other persons in other circumstances not only in play, but in story-telling. It seems to be true that a child imagines himself the hero of every story that he hears or reads, and every normal child acts out afterward most of the stories he hears or the drama he witnesses. “Something happens as we desire to have it happen to ourselves,” says Stevenson; “some situation, that we have long dallied with in fancy, is realized in the story with enticing and appropriate details. Then we forget the characters; then we push the hero aside; then11 we plunge into the tale in our own person and bathe in fresh experiences; and then, and then only, do we say we have been reading a romance.” Many children go even further and perform continuations of such dramas of their own invention, or play for an entire winter successive chapters of a favorite story.

Another way of creating a world of fancy is by playing grown-up. This is, of course, a reproduction, as far as the child’s powers permit, of literal adult activities, with, however, somewhat more of the imaginative element. Dr. G. Stanley Hall calls attention to the fact that, while little children will imitate animals, there soon comes a time when they cease to do so and imitate only human beings: during childhood those who perform the more active occupations; during adolescent those who express what are to them the ideals of character.

The little child rolls up a piece of paper, and imitates the action of his father when smoking a cigarette. But the growing boy smokes a real cigarette, so that he may feel himself a man. This expression of imagination is sometimes innocent and pleasant; but, where it is a copying of adult follies, an endeavor to enter adult experiences too soon, it gives us a race of blasé young-old persons who have no laid-up treasures.

Its Expression in Middle Childhood
During middle childhood, from six to nine, the interest in dramatic play continues to be strong. But the comparative meagerness of the imagination during this period makes the playmate more of a necessity than in preceding years. In early childhood the tendency to create playmates is so strong that the child enjoys playing alone. During the self-assertive years between six and nine, however, the child plays, more or less quarrelsomely, with others, taking them in as characters of his mimic world and enriching his own play by their conjunct12 imaginativeness. This explains why the leader of the gang is usually the most resourceful individual in the group, since he is the one who is depended upon to successfully conduct their imaginative play.

The welcome occasionally extended to adult leadership in youthful gangs has this same explanation: the adult keeps thinking of something new to do when the resourcefulness of his juniors runs dry.

But adult supervision should not prevent the child from using his constructive instinct which is fast developing during this period. It can aid the expression of the dramatic impulse in the creation of costumes, properties, etc., for the representations of characters and scenes from myths and stories. The reading should now be made wide enough to include many models for the child’s dramatic play. A certain amount of dependence upon himself for the construction of his playthings assists in calling forth ingenuity. Some years ago, in Chicago, an Italian boy is said to have invented the “pushmobile” or “autoped,” as it is variously called, which, though repressed then by the city authorities, is to-day such a delight to our boys and girls. This invention has been described as follows:

“He took a board, about four feet long, and fastened half a roller skate to each end. To one end of the upper side he fastened a soap box. Then steadying himself by means of the box and putting one foot on the board and propelling himself with the other he went zip! The speed attained was almost incredible. The boy next door caught sight of him in his flight and looked about for a board, a roller skate and a soap box. Then the boy across the street caught the idea, and before many days there were 10,000 pushmobiles in the city of Chicago. The advantage of the pushmobile was (we are obliged to use the past tense for it has been suppressed) that it was invented, manufactured, and perfected by the boys themselves. It was distinctly the creation of the city boy, the offspring of cement walks and asphalt pavements. It could not have13 come into being in the country. It represented ingenuity, resourcefulness, industry, and progress.”

The writer might have added, it represented in most distinct form the dramatic instinct. One reason why playground leaders have begun to add theatricals to the play-shelters connected with the Chicago playgrounds is because they believe that the origination called forth by story-playing will overcome the dead inertia of the oversupervised and overdictated playgrounds.

It is through environment and the adequate supply of implements, rather than direction, that the dramatic impulse of these years can best be developed. There is “imitation of nearly every occupation or custom known to children,” says Johnson in Education by Plays and Games. He lists “such plays as firemen, expressmen, conductors, soldiers, Indians, cowboys, store, school, house, doll play of infinite variety, traveling, calling, party,” as typical of middle childhood. They suggest to us an important use of the dramatic impulse during the period when the child is becoming acquainted with the world outside his home.

Its Expression in Later Childhood
There comes a time in the life of most children, at about the tenth year, when they take pleasure in expressing dramatic ideas to an audience. The earliest expression of this instinct in the two previous eras was individualistic; this is social. The other two were quite unconscious; this is self-conscious from the beginning. Such expression of the dramatic instinct would seem to have a close relation to and be a preparation for the theatrical profession. On the contrary, however, the desire for dramatic expression belongs to children who have the very slightest dramatic ability. Its organized expression, instead of encouraging young people to become professional actors, usually quite satisfies that fever and is somewhat of an antidote for it.

14The plays, therefore, include attempts at circus-playing, minstrel shows, wild West shows, etc. The constructive instinct is now so well developed that rather elaborate “properties” can be made to help stage these productions. The intense physical activity of this “Big-Injun” age makes such imitative plays as Indian, hunter, trapper, etc., especially appealing. Though the main ideas for these plays and for those given before an audience have been gained from observation and reading, there is much originality and creativeness exhibited if the dramatic instinct has been allowed to develop in previous years.

In later childhood and youth young people begin to organize themselves into clubs and societies, which represent the people and customs of another age or the social organizations of adults. This instinct is seen even among grown people in the secret lodges, where men, who have apparently outgrown the play spirit, find a genuine satisfaction in being known as “knights,” engaging in secret rites reproductive of magic and mystery, and banding themselves into fraternities which bring down the names, traditions and ideals of mediæval guilds and chivalric orders.

While this third era is later than the second, it does not supersede it, but lives alongside of it. The desire to appear before an audience persists usually only as there are easy opportunities for doing so, but the youth of unspoiled fancy continues all his life long to create imaginary people and to live in a world of ideals. It is thus that he is able to keep the spirit of youth by which he can sympathize with those of the younger generation, and continue to hope and have faith even when the world appears to be too much for him.

The matter of actual dramatic impersonation is but a small and temporary part of the range of the dramatic instinct. This paper touches upon it, but does not emphasize it. The dramatic instinct is too large, too useful, too inspiring to be confined to occasional forensic or theatrical performances.

15
II. The Educational Value of This Instinct
Two thirds of all play is dramatic play. Those who believe in the educational value of play must, therefore, not neglect this phase of it.

The child who engages in dramatic play reproduces and enacts, and so realizes the ideas around him. He so focuses imagination that what would otherwise be vague pictures are made real by his own activity.

“Dramatic work,” says Gesell, “organizes the child’s thinking. The simple and imperfect images of childhood are vivified and crystallized by being transformed into the movements which express them, and a child emerges from dramatic representation fortified in his mental imagery.” A child who tries to “act a horse,” as Mrs. Gruenberg tells us, will be much more apt to notice all the different activities and habits of the horse than a child who observes passively.

“The child,” says Dr. Gesell, “does not smile when he is glad, but fairly dances with joy. He does not shed a few tears when he is unhappy, but kicks and shakes with his grief. The opportunity to make use of his whole body in the expression of his feeling, which he is compelled to do in dramatic interpretation, will serve to equalize and conserve his moral strength. Emotional expression, although dependent upon instinct, must not be left to chance. Instinct and emotion are as capable of organization as motor and mental processes.”

One writer (Anne Throop Craig) suggests the use of the dramatic impulse instead of the usual school gymnastics as a means of relaxation, since it involves the use of the child’s whole body. “Let them act a little play,” she says. “Let them make it up on the spur of the moment.”

What we remember best is that which we learned dramatically. “The fact acted out is the fact remembered,” says Mrs. Herts. What we remember out of books is that which we have in some fashion16 ourselves reproduced. Our memories of the Bible even are chiefly those related to some dramatic event, such as the ritual of the church, a revival or some dramatic method which was used incidentally or purposefully in our Bible study. Letting the children act out such stories as those of Moses, Joseph and Samuel, as is being done in many of our church schools to-day, not only arouses interest but helps to fix the knowledge of the Bible’s wonderful hero stories firmly in their minds.

“That which the child understands,” says Gesell, “must bear an intimate and personal relation. Just as he must take into his hands the concrete thing he studies, and by physical contact understand it, so, to understand thought, emotion, character, he must assimilate them, lose himself in them, and become for the time being that thing which he interprets. Through such interpretation the child touches heights and depths which otherwise might never enter into his experience. Life becomes larger as he learns to lay aside his own limitations and put himself in the other man’s place. He need not wait to enlist in the army to become a soldier, nor carry a real gun to acquire a martial step. He need not do wrong himself in order to know the remorse of wrongdoing.”

A child who merely reads about a foreign people gathers only a dull catalog of external facts, which he soon forgets; but the child who puts on a foreign costume and endeavors to imitate the actions of its owner begins to get from his experiences the feeling which the other has. “Recently I went into a practice school connected with the University of Chicago,” writes President Faunce, “where I saw the children gathered round a teacher who was reading to them the poem of ‘Hiawatha,’ and their eyes were wide with wonder. Then they went over into the Field Columbian Museum and saw the materials of Indian life, the tents and the wampum, the feathers and the moccasins, and all the utensils of the Indian household. Then they returned and17 modeled in clay an Indian village, with Hiawatha at one end of it, and all over it the marks of the creative imagination.”

In contrast, Dr. Faunce says: “I too learned ‘Hiawatha,’ side by side with Mr. Colburn’s ingenuities. I could spell the name of every tree in Hiawatha’s forest, but would not have known one of them if I had seen it. I could pronounce the name of every beast on the American continent or in Noah’s ark, but knew nothing about any one of them.”

Says O’Shea: “Every personality he assumes stretches his own in one direction or another, enriches it perhaps, or at least broadens it. Through personation one gets the point of view of others; he discovers how it feels in a broad sense to do as they do, and is put in a way to sympathize with them. Again, when the child creates an environment, and then reacts upon it, he is really pre-adjusting himself to that environment.”

The child who engages in dramatic expression not only visualizes more clearly, but more practically. “A child with imagination,” as Mrs. Gruenberg says, “can picture to himself what he is expected to do, and easily translates his instructions into action. To the unimaginative child the directions given will be so many words, and he cannot carry out his instructions so effectively.” This resourcefulness is important. It is the unimaginative child who is always wailing, “What shall I do now?” The child who plays dramatically can be whatever he likes, and have whatever he likes, and always has something to do. And in later life it stands to reason that it will be the men and women who have habitually seen with their imaginations, who have visualized unexpected situations, who will display “faculty” and effectiveness.

This is real education.

The dramatic instinct brings out a number of traits of very great value. It develops initiative and ingenuity and resourcefulness. It helps make18 clear the difference between the imaginary and the real. It helps one to acquire unconsciousness of self, grace of demeanor and the correct use of the voice. It develops the power of action in groups and of ready and unselfish cooperation. It relates itself to English, elocution, drawing, and shop work, and is as important in its inspiring effect upon craftsmanship, in the making of costumes, scenery, and stage effects, as upon the acting itself. The portrayal of scenes from polite life helps politeness, and to imitate a courteous character tends toward the habit of courtesy. “A book on manners and customs will be little used until the child needs the information which it contains to portray some character.”

An interest in literature may first be aroused through the stimulation of the dramatic instinct. Robert Browning, in his poem “Development,” tells how his father, by acting out with him the story of the Iliad, and then suggesting that he might himself find out more about it through reading such and such a book in the library, aroused in him the intense love of the classics which was his through life.

It has also an important part in helping to forecast a child’s future. “I fancy an individual standing hesitant at the center of a great circle, the circle of his possibilities,” says Mrs Howard Braucher. “One small amount of that circle, a part of his potential life, he actually lives—the dramatic instinct is the key which admits him to at least a glimpse of what the rest might have been.” Of what the rest may be, she might have said, because the full expression of the dramatic instinct has often inspired a child with courage to enter the entire circle of his possibilities.

Like all human instincts, the dramatic instinct may be misused. It must not be confused with dramatic talent, which is a special gift bestowed upon only a few. The dramatic impulse in children, as Joseph Lee says, is “not the impulse toward19 dramatics in the grown-up sense—toward representing to other people what is passing in the actor’s mind. It is, rather, the converse of this, being the method whereby children make clear to themselves what they suppose to be in the minds of other people and of other things, or of what is dimly passing in their own.”

The educational value, therefore, of the instinct, lies not in producing finished dramatic products, but in cultivating the child’s imagination through expression.

The Moral Value of This Instinct
The moral values are even greater than the educational. The dramatic instinct is, in the main, a wholesome outlet to a child’s energies. “Good imagination,” says Kirtley, “is good hygiene.” The child ceases to be an obstreperous nuisance who has some imaginative task to perform. Through taking his part, perhaps a minor one, in dramatic play, he learns to cooperate unselfishly with others. Acting itself develops a sense of humor which tends toward a sympathetic philosophy of life.

Dramatic play tends to make the sympathetic attitude continuous. The adult whom you love because she is so sympathetic is sympathetic because she has imagination, because she can put herself imaginatively in your place. The only child or the child brought up by a private tutor lacks sympathy because he has had so few opportunities to put himself in the place of anybody else.

But the great moral value of the dramatic instinct is that it gives a child the opportunity to understand moral issues by having imitative experiences of them.

“In life,” says Mrs. Herts, “youth could hardly discern the miser, spendthrift, liar, hypocrite, egoist, prodigal, swindler, gambler, patriot, martyr, and all the rest. Each quality is disguised and mixed with others. But the drama presents a large repertory20 of such simplified, elemental human qualities, admirably adjusted to the educative or apprenticeship stage of life. The primitive traits, of which human nature is made up, can be observed and studied as a mechanic studies a machine, part by part, before it is put together.”

In her play with her doll, the little girl learns self-control. Because to her the doll is as real as her baby brother or sister, she can be made to feel that she, as its mother, must be a good example and not lose her temper. Working together with others, in later childhood, while dramatizing a story or playing a dramatic game, further assists the child to gain control of self with all its conflicting impulses.

By making work pleasurable, the habit of industry may be rooted early in the child’s life through the use of the dramatic impulse. In Education by Plays and Games, G. E. Johnson tells of a father who succeeded in getting his boys to pick up all the stones in a field and pile them in one spot, by placing a large stone in the center and suggesting it as a mark for the boys to pitch stones at.

Mrs. Herts illustrates the character-making power which comes from performing a noble part in a drama by the following experience:

“We counted the months of careful, patient training well spent when it served to bring the soul of our boy of an East Side tenement into points of contact with the soul and spirit of the chivalrous young prince, and from these points of contact to stimulate him into action. What has the playing of the character of Edward done for this boy besides affording him some months of genuine happiness? It has recovered and strengthened his own will power through the stimulus of Edward’s will; the boy had lost and so found himself in the joy and sorrow of the young English prince. The proper direction and control of his dramatic impulse had brought him into such intimate association with young Edward, Prince of21 Wales, that the thrill of Edward’s valor will forever afterward be unconsciously a part of himself, for something struggling in his starved soul has demanded and received expression. In the last act of the drama, when the young prince, in the rags of Tom Canty, the pauper, makes sturdy claim to his righteous throne, it was good to see this youth of the streets raise his hand with natural dignity, and, when Lord Seymour, with selfish motive, would oppose him, cry out, ‘Hold, Lord Seymour, and stand not in the way when God brings right!’”

It is believed the occasional performance of even an unworthy character has a certain purgative moral effect. Referring to the influence of playing the unpleasant part of Minna in “Little Lord Fauntleroy,” Mrs. Herts says: “A number of nice girls who had played Minna formerly had fallen into the error of wearing plumed picture-hats and transparent waists to business. One does not like to tell a nice girl that she cannot secure the respect of good business men while unsuitably dressed for her work. The social worker who, with the best intention, intrudes personal advice because those he desires to help chance to reside on lower East Broadway instead of upper Fifth Avenue merely displays poor taste and is inapt to alter a mistaken point of view in a matter so vital to all young girls as clothes. The use of dramatic instinct to stir the girl’s imagination to the realization that the quiet garments of Mrs. Errol clothe the body of a woman whose qualities of mind and soul the girl desires to emulate, while Minna’s gaudy apparel clothes the body of a woman whom the girl has grown to understand but not to admire, proved with us to be a very legitimate use of the primitive impulse to truly educational ends.”

“In taking a part in which there is evil,” adds Frederica Beard, “it is quite possible that a young actor will see the outcome of a bad deed, as it is not possible for him to see it immediately in life. He may discern the workings of conscience in the22 character he represents, or he may have to bear the consequences of wrongdoing. If neither of these things is depicted in the play, then the character is not one to be played by young people.”

“The development of expression through the right service of the dramatic instinct ... will serve to stimulate discrimination, a quick eye and hand and heart with added taste for the beautiful, while development in responsiveness to the best and noblest people and things of all the ages will create taste and discrimination in the choice of individual surroundings, deeds, actions, and ambitions” (Mrs. Herts).

The Inspirational Value of This Instinct
Mr. Lee says that “the first really important shock that comes to a young man’s religious sentiment in this world is the number of bored-looking people around, doing right.” Perhaps our greatest moral task with young folks is to persuade them that it is not only wise to be good, but happy to be good. If we are going to do this, we must reveal to them larger sources of joy.

“So many of our children to-day,” Mrs. Braucher says, “are somehow missing the childlike fancy, the buoyant self-forgetfulness, which comes from living in a half-real world. Perhaps they are poor rich children with mechanical toys and so many opportunities to see stupendous productions of the old fairy tales behind real footlights that the home plays seem crude. Perhaps they are rich poor children who live so close to the pain and the burden and the specter that the airy forms of fairy life have quite flitted away. Or, perhaps, they are just normal healthy children whose childlike realism, for want of the suggestive touch of fancy, has shut out the dim fairy figures—whoever they are, wherever they are, do you want them to lose this unreal, very real part of their lives? Books and stories will help—will plant the seed—but only the appeal to the dramatic instinct will cause it to blossom as the rose.”

23Dramatic play prevents the emotional nature from becoming inert, and thus keeps the possibility of joyousness forever alive. It retains the imagination and fancy that are so essential to perpetual youth. It is the only possible door to romance and mystery that will remain open for many. It satisfies the human craving to realize the meaning of life regardless of its environment. It is the best way to have life and to have it more abundantly.

Says Mrs. Herts: “A majority of young people as well as children experience a hunger of the soul to live out impulses denied expression in their personal lives. Eternal Personality restricts and shapes us into the limits of our environment. Youth chafes against such limit. The impulses of humanity stir beyond the reach of mere personality, time, and circumstance. Johnnie wants to be a pirate, Miss Smith a queen, young Harry a martyr. This is nature’s provision against spiritual isolation. This hunger of the soul for experience is as elemental a demand for nourishment as the hunger of the body for food. The dramatic instinct is an expression of this elemental hunger.”

Continuing she says: “It is the common, ordinary, free heritage of every child, unconsciously operative in every human being from the cradle to the grave. It is among the great basic forces whereby God shapes humanity.... It is the force which makes the soldier on the battlefield grasp his country’s flag, and raising it high above his head, cry out, ‘On to victory,’ even though that victory includes the death of his own body. It sustains the monk in his vigils, the statesman in his patriotism, the preacher in his pulpit.”

In short, it is the power by which we make real our ideals.

The strongest moral influence of the dramatic instinct comes in adolescence, when it shows itself in the form of aping the manners and copying the ideals of one’s personal hero. O’Shea gives much attention to this. He calls us to notice the fact24 that “children of all ages normally choose for their companions those of a dynamic nature, who are able ‘to do things.’ Persons of a static tendency, though ‘good’ and ‘respectable,’ are not commonly emulated by the young. In any community it will probably be found that men of action, whatever this may be—men who accomplish things—become dominant in the impersonations of the young.”

Cooley, discussing this particular point, illustrates it in an effective way. Speaking of the child’s love of action, he says that “his father sitting at his desk probably seems an inert and unattractive phenomenon, but the man who can make shavings or dig a deep hole is a hero; and the seemingly perverse admiration which children at a later age show for circus men and for the pirates and desperadoes they read about is to be explained in a similar manner. What they want is evident power. The scholar may possibly be as worthy of admiration as the acrobat or the policeman; but the boy of ten will seldom see the matter in that light.”

Now all this is dramatic. It indicates the strong tendency to copy those who are most easily copied, namely, those whose ideals and actions lend themselves, because of their vigor and theatric picturesqueness, to outward impersonation. The parent is performing the highest moral service to his children who can furnish them heroic dramatic examples, if possible by his own activities and career, or by entering heartily with them into dramatic play of such a character as to create the illusion of adventure, or by exposing them to wholesome persons of an age a little greater than their own who are either spectacular in act or dramatic in play.

III. Summary
During childhood, boys and girls pass through three periods in the evolution of the dramatic instinct. Little children imitate people and animals in real situations, endeavoring to mirror the world as they understand it. Beginning at about the third25 year, they commence to create a play-self living in a play-world, and this power of making illusions, as the expression of the hunger to realize life to its fullest extent, lasts as long as people live.

From six to nine children are eagerly becoming acquainted with the world outside the home. The dramatic impulse is then expressed in the imitation of every occupation and custom known to them. The developing tendency to construct aids the dramatic play.

Parallel with this, perhaps at about the tenth year, comes the period when they begin to take pleasure in impersonating dramatic ideas to an audience. This expression of the instinct tends to fade away after adolescence.

The dramatic instinct is of great educational value. It helps the child to realize his world and organize his thinking. He remembers best what he has learned dramatically. It enlarges his experiences and enables him to put himself, both by knowledge and sympathy, in the other man’s place. It is an important factor in mastering literature and history and in becoming familiar with the spirit of other races. It is extremely useful in developing resourcefulness, and the capacity for meeting novel situations. It carries interest and enthusiasm into all school subjects and helps shape the child’s ideals for the future.

The dramatic instinct has a great moral value. It gives a wholesome outlet to a child’s energies; it develops unselfishness; it creates a sympathetic imagination; and it gives a child the opportunity to understand moral issues by having imitative experiences of them.

The dramatic instinct has great inspirational value. It carries fancy through life, is the only possible door to romance for many, and furnishes through hero-worship, the strongest possible incentives to keep noble ideals.

The final intent of the dramatic instinct is that it should minister to fullness of life.

26We remember how Pollyanna, by finding something glad in every circumstance, succeeded not only in glorifying, but in actually transforming an existence that promised to be cheerless. This is what the dramatic instinct may do for us. Not only does it conjure up illusions in which it is charming to live, but it is so dynamic that it actually tends to change circumstances and helps reshape the world according to our dreams. The stodgy soul without vision squats in the midst of literal realities, but “the dreamer lives forever.”

References[2]
[2] Books recommended in this pamphlet may be secured through the publishers of the pamphlet.

The principal sources for this monograph are as follows:

Studies of Childhood. James Sully.

Contains an excellent chapter upon “The Age of Imagination.”

Child’s Play. Robert Louis Stevenson.

A wonderfully incisive little study of the imaginative play of childhood from his “Virginibus Puerisque.”

The Children’s Educational Theatre. Alice Minnie Herts.

Contains an excellent series of chapters upon the dramatic instinct.

The Individual in the Making. E. A. Kirkpatrick.

Gives full recognition to imagination at each stage of the child’s development.

Your Child To-day and To-morrow. Mrs. Zidonie M. Gruenberg.

A good chapter on imagination.

The Normal Child and Primary Education. Arnold L. and Beatrice Chandler Gesell.

Contains an excellent chapter on “Dramatic Expression,” showing how to utilize this instinct with children up to six years of age.

Problems of Dramatic Play. Mrs. Howard S. Braucher.

A pamphlet emphasizing the value of this instinct and giving lists of story-plays and dramas for children.

27The Spirit of Youth and City Streets. Jane Addams.

A plea for the drama in the development of child life.

Play in Education. Joseph Lee.

An excellent characterization of childhood, with special reference to the dramatic instinct in Chapters XVII to XXI.

Education by Plays and Games. George E. Johnson.

Contains a list of dramatic games characteristic of each period of childhood.

Psychology of Childhood. Norsworthy and Whitley.

Contains many good suggestions upon the development and value of dramatic expression.

The Development of a Dramatic Element in Education. Anne Throop Craig.

A suggestive article in The Pedagogical Seminary for March, 1908.

THE AMERICAN HOME SERIES
NORMAN E. RICHARDSON, Editor

The Nation’s Challenge to the Home
How One Real Mother Lives with Her Children
Parenthood and Heredity
The Roots of Disposition and Character
The First Year in a Baby’s Life
Thumb-Sucking
The Education of the Baby Until It Is One Year Old
First Steps Toward Character
The Second and Third Years
The Education of the Child During the Second and Third Years
The Mother as Playfellow (Years One, Two, and Three)
The Problems of Temper
The Problems of Fighting
The Government of Young Children
The Punishment of Children
The Home Kindergarten
The Religious Nurture of a Little Child (Years
Four and Five)
The Nervous Child
On Truth Telling and the Problem of Children’s Lies
The Government of Children Between Six and Twelve
The Dramatic Instinct in Children
Dramatics in the Home
Table Talk in the Home
Sunday in the Home
A Year of Good Sundays
The Picture-Hour in the Home
Story-Telling in the Home
Music in the Home
Training in Thrift
“What to Say” in Telling the Story of Life’s Renewal
Sex Discipline for Boys in the Home
Youth’s Outlook Upon Life
Building for Womanhood
Rhythm and Recreation
Prices will be Furnished on Application

Transcriber’s Note:

Punctuation has been standardised.

Page 26
remember how Pollyana changed to
remember how Pollyanna

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DRAMATIC INSTINCT IN CHILDREN ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Terriford mystery
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: The Terriford mystery

Author: Marie Belloc Lowndes

Release date: May 20, 2023 [eBook #70810]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Doubleday, Page & Company, 1924

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY ***
THE
TERRIFORD MYSTERY
BOOKS BY
MRS. BELLOC LOWNDES
Life and Letters of Charlotte Elizabeth, Princess Palatine
The Heart of Penelope
Barbara Rebell
The Pulse of Life
The Uttermost Farthing
Studies in Wives
When no Man Pursueth
Jane Oglander
The Chink in the Armour
Mary Pechell
Studies in Love and in Terror
The Lodger
The End of Her Honeymoon
Told in Gallant Deeds: A Child’s History of the War
Good Old Anna
The Red Cross Barge
Lilla: A Part of Her Life
Out of the War
Love and Hatred
The Lonely House
From the Vasty Deep
The Terriford Mystery
THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY
BY
MRS. BELLOC LOWNDES
logo
“Tattlers also, and busy-bodies, speaking things which they ought not.”
—I. Tim v. 13.
GARDEN CITY NEW YORK
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
1924
COPYRIGHT, 1924, BY
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY THE CHICAGO DAILY NEWS CO.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
AT
THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.
First Edition
THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY
1
PROLOGUE
Terriford village, a peaceful, exquisite corner of old England. Houses, cottages, and great raftered barns spread over a rising stretch of what was once primeval woodland. No dwelling-place is less than fifty years old and many are of much older date.

At the apex of the broad, well-kept village street stands the pre-Reformation gray stone church. It rises from what appears to be a well-tended and fragrant garden, though here and there lichened stones and crosses show it to be what old-fashioned folk still call a graveyard.

But at the time my story opens sudden death, and all the evils the most normal death implies in our strange, transitory existence, seem very far from the inhabitants of Terriford. All the more remote because the group of people who are soon to be concerned with a mysterious and terrible drama of death are now one and all happy, cheerful, and full of life and excitement. For they are present as privileged spectators at the first appearance of the great Australian cricket team.

Why, it may well be asked, should quiet Terriford village be so honoured? It is because Harry Garlett, the man who stands to the hamlet in the relation of squire, is the most popular amateur cricketer in the county and the owner of the best private cricket ground in England. Not only money, but a wealth of loving care combined with great technical knowledge and experience, has brought it near to absolute perfection—this fine expanse of English turf, framed in a garland of noble English elms and spreading chestnut trees.

2Months ago in the dreary winter, when the tour of the Australian test match team was being arranged, Garlett had invited the visitors to come to Terriford immediately on landing from the boat and “play themselves in” after the long voyage. He undertook to collect a strong team of amateurs, stiffened with two or three professionals, that the Australians might have something worth tackling, and he did not fail to point out that at Terriford the visitors would most quickly become accustomed to English pitches and the soft English light, so different from the hard dry sunshine and matting wickets of Australia.

Harry Garlett knew that the merits of his private ground were well known over there, on the other side of the world, but all the same he could not feel sure. And so it was one of the happiest moments of a life which had been singularly happy and fortunate when he received the cable informing him that the Australian team would accept with pleasure his kind invitation.

To-day, on this bright spring morning, the closing day of the great match, there could be no more characteristically English scene than this mixture of country-house party, garden party, and enthusiasts for the national game.

The cricket is serious, but not so serious as to risk interfering with good fellowship, the more so that this match does not count in the tour for records and averages. The spirit of the whole affair is one of pure good sportsmanship, and the small group of newspaper experts whom Garlett has invited are all eager to see how the visitors shape and how they compare with the great Australian teams of the past.

These connoisseurs are also full of admiration for the eleven which their host has collected. It is indeed a cleverly composed combination. Youth is represented by some brilliant young players from Oxford and Cambridge, cheerful fellows who are equally likely to hit up centuries or to make the two noughts familiarly known as “a pair of spectacles.” But these lads are as active as monkeys in the field and can save seemingly certain runs and bring off seemingly impossible “catches.”

Then there is a sprinkling of somewhat older, but still 3young men, who have proved their mettle in the great county teams. Last, but not least, there are three professionals—men whose names are known wherever cricket is played and who are past-masters in all the subtleties of the great game.

Decidedly the Cornstalks, though the odds are slightly in their favour, will have to play all out if they are to win.

Any one who envied Harry Garlett his manifold good fortune, his popularity, his good looks, his ideal life in “Easy Street,” for he is a prosperous manufacturer as well as a famous cricketer, might argue that were it not for the long voyage from Australia the Garlett eleven would be beaten to a frazzle. But the general feeling is that it is just that handicap on the visitors which equalizes the chances and makes the match one of real sporting interest.

The pavilion is situated at the top of the cricket field and commands a splendid view of the game. But the game is not the only thing. Indeed, there are people there to whom it is not only an excuse to meet, to gossip, and to enjoy a generous host’s delightful hospitality. For, at the back of the great room where Harry Garlett’s special guests are all gathered together, is a buffet loaded with every kind of delicious food, wine, and spirits. Garlett, though himself abstemious as every keen athlete has need to be, always offers the best of cheer to his friends, ay, and not only to his friends, for bounteous free refreshments are also provided for the village folk as well as for certain cricket enthusiasts from the county town of Grendon.

And now let us concentrate on a little group of people in the pavilion, all obviously quite at ease with one another, and all bent on making the most of a memorable occasion. Very ordinary folk they are, typical inhabitants of almost any English village.

First, in order of precedence—the rector and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Cole-Wright, he kindly and far from clever, facts which make him popular, his wife clever and not over kindly, and therefore far less popular.

Then come Dr. and Mrs. Maclean. The wise physician, whose fame goes far beyond the confines of his practice, has snatched a day off from his busy life in order to be present at the closing scenes of the great match. Both he and his wife are Scotch, but they have lived for fifteen 4years very happily in this typical English village. They are a closely united couple, and the one lack in their joint life has lately been satisfied by their adoption of Mrs. Maclean’s niece, Jean Bower, an attractive, cheerful-looking, happy girl whose first introduction to the neighbourhood is taking place to-day in Harry Garlett’s cricket pavilion. Jean is only twenty-one, but she is not an idle girl. It is known that she did good work during the last part of the war, and she has lately been made secretary to the Etna China Company of which Harry Garlett is managing director.

As to the other people there, they include Colonel Brackbury, the Governor of Grendon Prison, his sharp-featured wife and two pretty daughters; Mr. Toogood, chief lawyer in Grendon, with his wife and daughter; Dr. Tasker, one of the few bachelors in the neighbourhood; and, last but not least in that little group who are all on intimate terms with one another, and whose affairs are constantly discussed in secret by their humble neighbours, is Mary Prince, true type of that peculiarly English genus unkindly called “old maid.”

Miss Prince is at once narrow-minded and tolerant, mean and generous, wickedly malicious, while yet, in a sense, exceedingly kind-hearted. Perhaps because her father was Dr. Maclean’s predecessor the village folk consult her concerning their ailments, grave and trifling, more often than they do the doctor himself.

There is one dark spot in the life of Harry Garlett. His devoted wife, to whom as an actual fact the whole of Terriford village belongs—or did belong till she made it over to him—is an invalid. Many months have gone by since she left the upper floor of the delightful Georgian manor house, which owes its unsuitable name of the Thatched House to the fact that it was built on the site of a medieval thatched building.

The Thatched House is a childless house, and Harry Garlett, though on the best of terms with his invalid wife, is constantly away, at any rate during the summer months, playing cricket here, there, and everywhere, all over England. So Agatha Cheale, Mrs. Garlett’s housekeeper, who is known to be a kinswoman of her employer, plays the part of hostess in the cricket pavilion. Even so, as the day wears on Miss 5Cheale disappears unobtrusively two or three times in order to see if Mrs. Garlett is comfortable and also to give her news of the cricket match and especially news of how Mr. Garlett is acquitting himself. Everything that concerns her husband is of deep moment to Mrs. Garlett, and she is exceedingly proud of his fame as a cricketer.

On this, the second day of the great match, the Australians have been set to make 234 runs in their second innings for victory. When the teams go in for lunch there are few, even among those to whom the finer shades of the game are as a sealed book, who doubt that they will do it pretty easily.

The pitch has worn wonderfully well, and Garlett feels a thrill of delight when he sees it roll out as true and plumb as on the first day. He thinks with intense satisfaction of all the patient care that he has devoted to this ground, of all the cunning devices of drainage lying hid beneath the level turf, and of the scientific treatment with which he has nursed the turf up to this acme of condition. Ah, money can do much, but money alone couldn’t have done that. He wants to win the match, but he emphatically does not want to owe victory to any defect of the pitch.

In such happy mood does Garlett lead his team out into the field after lunch, and the Australians start, full of confidence. But somehow, even from the beginning, they seem to find runs hard to get, harder than in their first knock.

The young undergraduates field like men inspired, covering an immense lot of ground and turning what seem certain fours into singles. Wickets fall, too. Some of the Australians open their Herculean shoulders too soon, and, beginning to hit before they are properly “set,” misjudge the ball and get caught from terrific “skiers.” But still the score creeps up. With careful generalship Garlett frequently changes his bowling, treating the batsmen to every variety of swerve and break that his bowlers can command.

The tension grows. One of Garlett’s professionals, a chartered jester of the Surrey team, forgets to play off the antics with which he is wont to amuse the crowd at the famous Oval ground, and suddenly becomes quite serious. 6Still the score mounts up. On the great staging beside the scorer’s box large tin numbers painted in white on a black ground show the progress of the game.

Now, the last Australian is going in. What is the score? Ah, see, the man is just changing the plates—yes, there it is! Nine wickets down for 230 runs. Only four more to make and the match is won—and lost!

What is the matter? Why is Mr. Garlett talking to the bowler? A little plan of campaign, no doubt. Every heart on the ground beats a little faster, even surely those well-schooled hearts concealed beneath the white flannels which stand out so brilliantly on the deep green of the pitch.

The newcomer takes his block. He is a huge creature with thick, jet-black beard, a good man at rounding up the most difficult steers on the far South Australian plains.

“Play!” Swift flies the ball from the height of the bowler’s swing, and our cattle tamer, playing forward, drives it with a mighty swipe. “Oh, well hit, sir!” Is it a boundary? If so, the match is won. No, no, one of Garlett’s agile undergraduates has arrived like a white flash at the right spot and at the right moment. Like lightning he gathers the ball and returns it to the wicket. Ah, a runout? No, yes, no—Black Beard has just got home. It was a narrow shave, but two precious runs have been added.

Only two more to make! Everyone is silent in the tense excitement. Again the ball flies from the bowler’s hand, and this time the Australian giant decides to go all out for a winning hit. He opens his brawny chest, all rippling with knotted muscles, and, taking the ball fair in the middle of the bat, lifts it in a huge and lofty curve which seems certain to come to earth beyond the boundary of the pitch.

But wait! Garlett is there, at extra long-on. It is the catch he has planned with the bowler. It is all over in a moment, and yet what a long moment it seems to the entranced spectators!

That little round leather ball high up against the evening sky reaches the top of its flight. Ah, it is over the pavilion! No, it is impossible! But Garlett does it, all the same. With a mighty backward leap he gets the ball into his safe hands just as it was dropping on to the seats in front of the pavilion.

7Out! Our cattle tamer is out, the last Australian wicket, and the match is won—by one run!

Every one feels the curious tingling thrill that comes of having seen a feat that will become historic. Garlett’s great catch that won the Australian match for his eleven will be talked about and written about for years to come, wherever cricket is had in honour.

Garlett has picked himself up from where he fell after his terrific leap—but still, you may be sure, holding the precious ball safely to his chest—and instantly he is the centre of a throng of cheering and congratulatory friends, among whom the Cornstalks themselves are foremost.

8
CHAPTER I
In the star-powdered sky there hung a pale, golden moon. It was the 25th of May, and though the day had been warm and sunny, it was cold to-night, and even as early as ten o’clock most of the lights were extinguished in Terriford village.

But “the moon is the lovers’ sun”: such was the conceit which a tall, loosely built man had just propounded to the girl walking by his side on the field path which lay like a white ribbon across the four cornfields stretching between the Thatched House Farm and the well-kept demesne of the Thatched House.

The girl—Lucy Warren was her name, and she was parlour-maid at the Thatched House—made no answer. She could well have spared the moonlight. She knew that not only her clever, capable mother, but also all the gossips who made up her little world, would be shocked indeed did they see her walking, in this slow, familiar, loverlike way, with her mother’s lodger, Guy Cheale.

Not that shrewd Mrs. Warren disliked her lodger. In spite of herself she had become very fond of him. He was such a queer, fantastic—had she known the word, she might have added cynical—young gentleman.

But though she liked him, and though his funny talk amused her, Mrs. Warren would have been wroth indeed had she known of the friendship between her lodger and her daughter. And the mother would have been right to feel wroth, for, while doing everything to make Lucy love him with that fresh, wonderful young love that only comes to a woman once, Guy Cheale never spoke to Lucy of marriage.

For the matter of that, how could he speak of marriage, being that melancholy thing, a penniless gentleman? A 9man whose lodging at the farm even was paid for by his sister, herself companion-housekeeper at the Thatched House. There were a dozen newspapers in London which would always print everything Guy Cheale chose to write, but he liked talking better than writing, and he was in very poor health.

Lucy hated to think that the man whom deep in her heart she had come passionately to love was too lazy—or was it really too ill?—to make a living. She disliked her lover’s sister, Agatha Cheale, with a deep, instinctive, fierce dislike, and sometimes she smiled, though it was not a happy smile, at the thought of how angry Miss Cheale would be if she knew that Mr. Cheale and she, Lucy, were lovers.

“Not quite so quick, my pretty Lucy!”

Guy Cheale was panting painfully—and a rush of that pity which is akin to love filled Lucy Warren’s heart.

“I mustn’t be late,” she said nervously.

“You’re not late, Lucy”—he held up his watch close to his eyes. “It’s only twenty to ten,” and then he added, in that voice which he knew how to make at once so strangely tender, persuasive, and yes—mocking, “Let’s go into our enchanted wood for five minutes, as you won’t let me in to that drawing room of yours.”

“It ain’t my drawing room, as you knows full well. If it was, you’d be welcome to come into it,” she exclaimed resentfully.

He guided her down the path leading to the wood, and then, once they were under the shelter of the trees, he clutched her to him with a strength which at once frightened and comforted her—for it seemed to prove that he could not be as ill as he was made out to be.

“Love and life,” he muttered, “the one’s no good without the other!” He bent his head and their lips clung together in a long long kiss.

And then Guy Cheale was filled with a delicious sense of triumph and of exultation. He had won this proud sensitive creature at last—after a long, to him a breathless, exciting chase.

But all at once he felt her stiffen in his arms.

“Hush!” she whispered. “There’s some one in the wood!”

10He did not relax his almost terrible grip of her, as he too, listened intently.

Lucy was right; he could hear the light, stuffless sound of footsteps sinking into the dead leaves which still, on this spring night, lay thickly spread on the path.

“Only happy lovers like you and me,” he whispered huskily. “They’re not troubling about us—why trouble about them?”

But the girl was frightened. “For God’s sake, go away, Mr. Cheale!” she pleaded in a terrified whisper.

“One kiss more, Lucy. Only one kiss more——”

But she lay inertly in his arms, all her senses absorbed in listening. How different from only fifty seconds ago!

“Lucy,” he whispered, “Lucy? We can’t part like this, to-night—the first time my goddess has yielded me her lips.”

Though full of nervous terror, she was moved by the real feeling in his voice.

“I’ll go and see who it is,” she muttered in his ear. “You stop where you are.”

“Promise to come back!”

For only answer she took up his thin right hand and laid it against her cheek; and then she crept quickly away, moving almost soundlessly along, for she knew every turn of the little wood.

At last she came back, panting a little.

“Who was it?” he whispered eagerly.

“I don’t know. They’re gone now. But I’ve not a minute left.”

He could hear by her voice that she was anxious, preoccupied, and with the strange, dangerous power he possessed of seeing into a woman’s mind he knew that she had not told the truth—that she was well aware of the identity of those other haunters of the enchanted wood. But he had no wish to share her knowledge. The good folk of Terriford, who meant so much to Lucy Warren, meant less than nothing to Guy Cheale.

“You and that tiresome old cook go up to bed as soon as you come in, don’t you?” he asked suddenly.

“Yes, we do,” she replied hesitatingly, knowing well, as she would have expressed it to herself, what he was after.

11“If I give you twenty minutes,” he whispered caressingly, “it will be quite safe for you to let me into the drawing room, eh—little hawk?”

It was his supreme term of endearment—and once more she allowed him to take her into his arms, and press her with an almost terrible strength to his breast. But——

“It’s wrong,” she whispered, “it’s wrong, Mr. Cheale. I ought never to have let you into the drawing room. ’Tain’t mine to use that way.”

“That’s why I like our doing it!” he chuckled.

And then with that queer touch of malicious triumph that fascinated her, he added: “What would sister Agatha say if walls could speak?”

“Don’t you go saying that! Miss Cheale’s never in the drawing room,” she exclaimed, affrighted at the very thought. “No one ever is—now that the mistress keeps upstairs.”

“No one but you and me, Psyche!” and then he took her face between his hands and lightly kissed it. “I won’t stay long to-night, I promise—but we can’t meet to-morrow, worse luck! Your uncle’s spending the night at the farm.”

“Can’t see what you fancy about Uncle Enoch——”

“I like lawyers—they’re such rascals! Why he was telling your mother all about Mrs. Garlett’s will last Sunday——”

“He never was?”

Lucy felt very much shocked. Even she knew that in doing such a thing her uncle, Enoch Bent, confidential clerk to Mr. Toogood, the leading lawyer of Grendon, was acting in a very dishonourable manner.

“Run along now,” exclaimed Guy Cheale, a touch of rasped impatience in his voice.

And then he seized her again in his arms—only to push her away. “I’ll wait till we can kiss at ease—in the drawing room! Strange that hideous, early Victorian temple of respectability should shelter the love of two wild hawks like you and me—eh, Lucy?”

And then she left him and hurried through the wood, uncaring now of the sounds her light footsteps made. She knew she was late—it must be quite a bit after ten o’clock. But cookie was a kindly, good-natured, elderly woman, and 12didn’t mind waiting up for a little while. But once, when Lucy had been half an hour late, Miss Cheale had caught her, and spoken to her very severely.

Aquarter of an hour later Lucy, after tiptoeing down the silent house, opened the drawing-room door, and, after closing it with infinite precaution, passed through into the dark room. Then she turned and locked the door behind her.

The white dimity covers of the heavy, early Victorian furniture by which Mrs. Garlett, the invalid sleeping just above the drawing room, set such store, made luminous patches in the big L-shaped apartment, and somehow added to Lucy Warren’s feeling of nervous unease.

Though the passionate, newly awakened side of her beating heart was burning to hear the tiny tap on the long French window which she knew would herald Guy Cheale’s approach, there was another side of the girl which hated and was deeply ashamed of allowing a meeting with her lover here.

She felt that whom she saw, and even what she did, when out of doors, under the sky, was no one’s business but her own—and perhaps, in a much lesser measure, her mother’s. She would also have felt differently had she and Guy Cheale been able to meet alone in the servants’ hall of the Thatched House. But the drawing room she felt to be ground sacred to Mrs. Garlett, so dear and precious indeed to the mistress of the Thatched House that it was never used now, not even on the rare occasions when Harry Garlett had a friend to dinner. Guy Cheale, however, had discovered that the drawing room, alone of all the ground-floor rooms of the spacious old house, had a French window opening into the garden, and he and Lucy Warren had already met there twice.

As Lucy stood in the dark room, listening intently, her nerves taut, her heart beating, there suddenly swept over her an awful prevision of evil, a sudden realization of her folly in allowing Guy Cheale to wile her heart away. She knew, alas! that he was spoiling her for the only life open to such as she—the life of an honest, commonplace, working man’s wife.

13She remembered to-night with an almost anguished vividness the first time she had ever seen Guy Cheale—last February, on her first “afternoon off” in the month. She had gone home to the Thatched House Farm to help her mother with the new gentleman lodger, and, being a girl of a proud independent nature, she had come prepared to dislike him, the more so that she hated his sister, Mrs. Garlett’s strict, sarcastic young lady housekeeper. And then she had opened the door of the little farmhouse parlour, and seen the big, loosely built fair man who was to be “her fate.”

His keen, thin, large-boned face, alive with a kind of gay, plucky humour, large heavy-lidded gray eyes, and long, loose-limbed figure, were each and all so utterly unlike Miss Cheale that no one could have believed them to be what they were, brother and sister.

Guy Cheale had often reverted to the enchanted moment that had brought them first face to face; and he had told her again and again what she was never tired of hearing—how beautiful, how proud and how disdainful he had thought her.

But she knew nothing of the cruel hunting instinct which had prompted what had immediately followed her entry into the room.

“What is your name?” he had asked, and when she answered, “Lucy, sir. I’m Mrs. Warren’s daughter,” he had got up and, gazing straight into her face, had uttered the strange, poignant words—“A dying man—for that’s what I’m supposed to be, my pretty dear—ought to be given a certain license, eh?”

“License, sir?” she had repeated, falteringly.

“License in the way of love-making! I suppose you know, Lucy, that I’m said to be dying? And so I am—dying for a little love!”

That had been the beginning of it all. And though she had been, for quite a long while, what she termed to herself “standoffish,” they had become, in time, dear friends—meeting often in secret, as some dear friends are forced to do. It had not been easy for them to meet, even in secret; for there is no place in the world so full of a kind of shrewd, cruel scandal-mongering as is an English village, and it said much for the intelligence, not only of Guy Cheale, but also 14of Lucy Warren, that their names had never yet been connected the one with the other.

All the same, as is always the way with a man and a woman who are determined on meeting, they had seen each other almost daily. And now and again they had had a grand, a wonderful innings! Once Mrs. Warren had had to go away for a week and Lucy had been given some hours off each day in order that she might prepare the lunch and supper of her mother’s lodger.

During those days—days on which he had insisted on helping her to do everything, even to the cooking of his meals in the big, comfortable farm kitchen, their friendship had grown apace. No man knew better the way to a woman’s heart, and, posing then as her friend, and only as her friend, he had encouraged her to talk about everything and everybody that interested her—her employer, Harry Garlett, the famous county cricketer, his sickly wife, and even the country village gossip.

Even so, in defence of her heart, Lucy Warren had put up a good fight—a fight which, as the time went on, stimulated, excited, sometimes even maddened Guy Cheale. He found, with surprise and even discomfiture, that what he had begun in idle and ignoble sport, was becoming to him a matter of interest, even of importance.

This, perhaps, was why now, while Lucy Warren stood in the dark drawing room, her mind filled with tense, questioning memories, Guy Cheale, padding up and down the lawn like some huge, loose-limbed creature of the woods, was also asking himself intimate, searching questions.

He was already ruefully aware that this would probably be one of the last times that he and this poor girl whom he had forced to love him would meet, and it irked him to know how much he would miss her from out his strange, sinister life—the life which he knew was ebbing slowly but surely to a close. He had made love to many, many women, but this was the first time he had been thrown into close intimacy with a country girl of Lucy’s class—that sturdy, self-respecting British yeoman class which has been for generations the backbone of the old country.

Very soon—how soon to a day not even Guy Cheale could tell—he would have left the Thatched Farm. And oh! how 15he would like to take Lucy with him, even for a little while. But, bad as he was, there was yet in him still a small leaven of good which forced him to admit that he owed Lucy Warren something for the love which, if passionate, was so pure and selfless. Sometimes, when he felt more ailing than usual, he would tell himself that when within sight of that mysterious bourne from which no traveller returns he would send for Lucy, marry her, and be nursed by her to the end.

But now, on this warm May night, he put painful thoughts away, and determined to extract the greatest possible enjoyment from what could only be, alas! the fleeting present.

Treading over the grass as lightly as might be, he leaped across the narrow gravel footpath which ran round the front of the house.

And then a most untoward thing happened! Unaware that Lucy had unlatched the hasp of the long French window, Guy Cheale leaned against it, panting, and fell forward into the room—his heavy boot crashing through one of the lower panes.

He uttered a stifled oath, then stood up and, walking forward, felt in the darkness for the terror-stricken girl. For a few minutes they stood together listening intently; then, reassured, he led her over to a couch and, throwing himself down on it, he clasped her to him closely.

His arms were round her, he was kissing her eagerly, thirstily, when all at once she gave a stifled cry—she had heard the handle turn in the locked door.

“I expect it’s Miss Cheale,” she whispered. “She taxed me the other night with having a sweetheart I was ashamed of! Go away—quick! She’ll get round to the window in a minute——”

Guy Cheale leaped up and rushed across the room. Desperately he tried to find the awkward, old-fashioned catch, and just as the second door of the drawing room—a door the existence of which Lucy had forgotten—was unlatched, and the electric light switched on, he flung open the window and disappeared into the dark garden.

But the figure which advanced slowly into the L-shaped room was not that of Agatha Cheale. Lucy, petrified with shame and fear, knew it for that of the invalid mistress of the Thatched House.

16Clad in an old-fashioned white dressing gown, her pallid face filled with mingled curiosity and fright, Mrs. Garlett looked like a wraith, and far more willingly would the girl, who stood before her with hanging head, have faced a real spirit.

For a long, breathless moment Mrs. Garlett, dazzled by the light, peered round her, looking this way and that. Then, “Lucy!” she exclaimed, in a tone of keen surprise and anger, and again, “Lucy?”

Turning slowly round, she called out to some one who apparently had remained in the passage outside.

“You can come in now, Miss Cheale. I was right and you were wrong. I did hear a noise upstairs—after all, my bedroom’s just over here. It was Lucy Warren—in here with a man. He has just escaped through the window.”

And then Miss Cheale, the woman whom Lucy Warren hated, feared and, yes, despised, came into the room. She gave one swift glance of contempt and reprobation at the unhappy culprit, glanced at the open French window, and, turning to her employer, exclaimed:

“I will see Lucy to-morrow morning, Mrs. Garlett. Please come up to bed at once. You’ve done a very dangerous thing in coming down like this!”

The invalid lady allowed herself to be led, unresisting, away; and then, mechanically, Lucy went over to the window and stared out, her bosom heaving with sobs, and tears streaming from her eyes.

But no kindly, mocking, caressing whisper came to comfort and reassure her out of the darkness. By this time Guy Cheale must be well on his way back to the farm.

Turning slowly, she threaded her way through the white-shrouded furniture, unlocked the door nearest to her, and walked out, forgetting or uncaring that the electric light which had been turned on by Mrs. Garlett by the other door was still burning.

17
CHAPTER II
It was twelve o’clock the next morning, and the sun was streaming into the pleasant downstairs rooms of the Thatched House. The only sign of last night’s alarums and excursions was the broken window in the drawing room, and of that no one but the three closely concerned were aware, for early in the morning Miss Cheale had crept downstairs, put out the electric light, and locked both the doors.

But Mrs. Garlett had been thoroughly upset by what had happened in the night, and Miss Cheale had thought it well to telephone for the doctor.

“No good to herself—and no good to anybody else, poor soul!”

Dr. Maclean was uttering his thoughts aloud, as even the most discreet of physicians will sometimes do when with an intimate acquaintance. He was speaking of his patient, Mrs. Garlett, and addressing Agatha Cheale.

There were people in Grendon who envied Agatha Cheale her position as practical mistress of the charming old house. She was known to be distantly related to its master, Harry Garlett, and that made her position there less that of a dependent than it might have been. No one else used the pretty little sitting room where she and the doctor were now standing. But Dr. Maclean—shrewd Scot that he was—knew that Agatha Cheale was not to be envied, and that her job was both a difficult and a thankless one.

As he uttered his thoughts aloud, his kindly eyes became focussed on the woman before him. She was slight and dark, her abundant, wavy hair cut almost as short as a boy’s. This morning the intensely bright eyes which were the most arresting feature of her face, and the only one she had in common with her fair-haired brother, had dark pouches under them.

18Dr. Maclean told himself that she had made a mistake in giving up the busy, useful, interesting life of secretary to the boss of a London trading company.

He asked suddenly: “When are you going to have your holiday?”

“I don’t know that I shall take a holiday.” She looked at him with a touch of tragic intensity. “I’m all right, really—though I don’t sleep as well as I might.”

“Don’t be angry with me for asking you a straight question.”

A wave of colour flooded her pale face. “I won’t promise to answer it!”

“Why do you go on with this thankless job?” he said earnestly. “Within a week or two at most I could find a competent nurse who could manage Mrs. Garlett. Why should you waste your life over that cantankerous, disagreeable woman?”

And then Agatha Cheale said something which very much surprised Dr. Maclean.

“I am thinking of giving up the job in September. That’s the real reason why I’m not going to take a holiday now. You see,” she hesitated perceptibly, “I’m afraid it will terribly upset Cousin Harry—my leaving here, I mean.”

“Of course it will upset him. Thanks to you, he can go off on his cricketing jaunts with a light heart. Master Harry’s a man to be envied——”

She turned and faced him. “With a wife like that?”

“He married her, after all!”

“Why did he marry her?”

Dr. Maclean hesitated a moment. Then he answered frankly: “Harry Garlett married Emily Jones because he was a simple, good-looking lad aged twenty-two, and she a clever, determined woman aged twenty-seven who was in love with him. Old Jones was a queer, suspicious creature—the Etna China Company was a one-man concern in his day. A business friend asked old Jones to give a young man in whom he was interested a job; and there came along that cheery young chap.”

“They’ve been married thirteen years to-day.”

“God bless my soul—so they have!” exclaimed Dr. Maclean. “But the war took a great chunk out of that, for 19Garlett joined up at once. I remember how surprised we all were. Somehow it didn’t seem necessary then—not for a man with a stake in the world. But he was mad to go, and he was in France early in ’fifteen.”

“She says it was then that she fell ill.”

“She was always ailing—she’s a thoroughly unhealthy woman,” Dr. Maclean spoke with abrupt decision. “I was looking at Dr. Prince’s casebook the other day, and I came across her entry. She was an unhealthy child and an unhealthy girl—far too fussy about herself always. Well I remember her bringing me the War Office telegram with the news of that awful wound of Garlett’s. But she wouldn’t go to France, not she! Yet—” he hesitated—“in her own queer way she’s absolutely devoted to him.”

Agatha Cheale said in a low voice, “None of us thought he could get over that wound.”

“Why, of course!” the doctor exclaimed. “You were there, Miss Cheale, in that French war hospital. But I suppose you’d known Harry Garlett long before then—as you’re his cousin?”

He looked at her rather hard.

“I’d never met Cousin Harry till we met in that strange way in France,” she answered composedly.

“He told me once that he owed his life to you.”

“That, of course, is nonsense,” she said in a hard tone.

“He has plenty to be grateful to you for now.”

Agatha Cheale’s usually pale face became suffused with dusky red. It was an overwhelming, an unbecoming blush, and, with a quickening of the pulse, Dr. Maclean told himself that this involuntary betrayal of deep feeling answered a question which he had half ashamedly often asked himself in the last year—was Agatha Cheale secretly attached to Harry Garlett? Was that the real reason she was spending her life, her intelligence, her undoubted cleverness, in looking after his sickly, tiresome wife?

Doctors know of many hidden tragedies, of many secret dramas in being, and this particular doctor knew more than most, for he had a very kindly heart. He felt glad that Mrs. Garlett’s companion was leaving the Thatched House, though her doing so would throw a good deal of trouble on him.

20After he had gone, Agatha Cheale went over to the window. There she pressed her forehead against the glass, and her eyes filled with bitter tears. For perhaps the thousandth time in the last few months she told herself that she would leave the Thatched House, forget Mrs. Garlett and her tiresome exactions, and, above all, forget Harry Garlett.

Harry Garlett? She did not require to shut her eyes to visualize the tall, still young-looking man whom the sick woman upstairs called husband. Every feature, every distinctive line about his good-looking, oftener merry than sad, alert expression of face, was printed on the tablets of Agatha’s tormented, unhappy heart.

Why was it that she, a proud woman, and, until she had met Harry Garlett, a cold woman, cared as she had come to care for this man? Garlett was not nearly as clever as many of the men with whom her work had brought her in contact during the war and since. The great surgeon whose favourite nurse she had become in the oddly managed, private war hospital, where all the square pegs had been forced into round holes, had shown her unmistakably that he was violently attracted by her dark, aloof beauty, but, far from being pleased, she had been bitterly distressed at what she had regarded as an insult.

Memories crowded thick upon her. She remembered cutting the bloodstained uniform off an unconscious form, and her thrill of surprise when she had read on his disc the most unusual name of Garlett—the second name by which she, herself, had been christened—she had never been able to discover why.

It was true, she had saved, not his life, but his bowling arm. And oh, how grateful he had been—then! At once they had fallen into the way, at first in joke, of calling each other “Cousin Harry” and “Cousin Agatha.” But there had been no love passages between them. He had at once told her that he was a married man, and very soon, also, she had come to understand that he was not “that sort.”

The war had been over some months when one day, by one of those chances which often deflect the whole of a human existence, they had run up against one another in a London street. She had asked him to come back to the modest rooms she occupied in Bloomsbury, and it was there 21that he had told her his wife was now a complete invalid, that she refused to have a nurse, and that it was difficult to get even a lady housekeeper who would satisfy her.

“Would you like me to try and find you some one?” she had asked. Eagerly he had caught at the suggestion, and that same night she had written and offered to come herself.

There had then taken place another interview between herself and the man who held for her so strong an attraction and appeal. It had been a rather emotional interview. Harry Garlett, filled with gratitude, had insisted that she should have a really large, some would have said an extravagant, salary, and she had revealed the existence of the clever, idle, sickly brother who was the ever-present burden and anxiety of her life.

It had been her suggestion that the people in the neighbourhood should be told that she and her employer were related. Her name was Agatha Garlett Cheale, after all. Surprised, he had yielded, reddening as he did so under his tan.

“I daresay you’re right! They’re a gossiping set of women in my part of the world.”

“Not more so than in other places,” and something had made her add: “They gossiped about us in the hospital, you know.”

“Did they? I didn’t know that!” And he had looked amused—only amused.

Her first sight of Mrs. Garlett—how well she remembered it! “Poor Emily” had not been very gracious, though in time she had thawed. The sick woman realized the difference cool, competent Agatha Cheale made to the Thatched House, and to herself Mrs. Garlett grudgingly admitted that Miss Cheale’s sense and discretion matched her more useful qualities.

To those ladies who were kind enough to call on her—and practically every lady in the neighbourhood considered it her duty to make acquaintance with Harry Garlett’s cousin—Agatha explained that she never went out in the evening. So the delicate question as to whether she was or was not to be asked out to dinner with her employer was solved once for all, in the way every hostess had hoped it would be.

22As Dr. Maclean walked quickly down the short avenue which led from the Thatched House to the carriage gate his mind was full of the woman he had just left.

He did not like Agatha Cheale, yet he did feel intensely sorry for her. For one thing she must be so lonely at times, for, with one exception, she had made no friends in either Terriford or Grendon.

The one person of whom she saw a good deal was clever, malicious Miss Prince. People had wondered more than once at the link between Miss Prince and Agatha Cheale, but there was nothing mysterious about it. Though Miss Prince was acquainted with every man, woman, and child in Terriford she led a somewhat solitary life in the Thatched Cottage, a pleasant little house which formed a kind of enclave in the Thatched House property. Thus propinquity had something to do with the friendship between the younger and the older woman.

There was one great difference, however, between them. Miss Prince was what some people call “churchy,” while Agatha Cheale never went to church at all, and on one occasion she had spoken to Dr. Maclean with a slightly contemptuous amusement of those who did.

The doctor was close to the wrought-iron gate giving into the road which led to his own house when, suddenly, he espied this very lady, Miss Prince, coming toward him. She held a basket in her hand, and he did not need to be told that it contained some dainty intended for Mrs. Garlett. Like so many sharp-tongued mortals, Miss Prince often did kind things, yet her opening remark was characteristic of her censorious attitude to her fellow creatures.

“It’s a good thing that Harry Garlett’s rather more at his factory just now. If it weren’t for poor old Dodson, that Etna China business would have gone to pieces long ago! I never saw a man gad about as he does——”

Without giving the doctor time to answer, she went on: “No change in poor Emily, I suppose?” She smiled disagreeably. “I expect you’d like to have ten other patients like her, Dr. Maclean?”

At once he carried the war into the enemy’s country.

“Did Dr. Prince like that type of tiresome, cantankerous, impossible-to-please patient?”

23“I know I was glad of them.”

“Very well for you who had the spending of the fees and none of the work!”

They generally sparred like this, jokingly in a sense, but with a sort of unpleasant edge to their banter.

“I don’t suppose Emily will ever get better—till she dies of old age,” laughed Miss Prince.

“As a matter of fact, she’s markedly less well than she was last year.”

Dr. Maclean didn’t know what provoked him to say that, though it was true that he had thought Mrs. Garlett rather less well than usual these last few weeks.

“It’s strange that everything in nature, having performed its work, dies, and that only we poor human beings linger on long after any usefulness we ever had in the world has gone,” said Miss Prince musingly.

“I don’t believe that Mrs. Garlett was ever useful,” he said curtly.

“Oh, yes, she was! In her queer way Emily was a very devoted daughter to that horrid old father of hers. And she’s made Harry Garlett.”

Again the spirit of contradiction seized him.

“I don’t know what you mean,” he exclaimed. “Harry Garlett’s the sort of chap who’d have got on far better as a bachelor than as a married man. His wife’s money has ruined him—that’s my view of it! There’s a lot more in Garlett than people think. If he hadn’t married that poor, sickly woman he might have done some real work in the world.”

“Dr. Maclean,” said Miss Prince abruptly, “I’m anxious about Agatha Cheale.”

“So am I, Miss Prince.”

He lowered his voice, for he didn’t want some stray gardener’s boy to overhear what he was about to say.

“You’re her only friend hereabouts,” he went on. “Do you know that she’s thinking of giving up her job? Mind you keep her up to that!”

She gave him a curious look.

“She’ll never go—as long as Harry Garlett’s here,” she said, almost in a whisper.

“Do you think Garlett will ask her to stay?”

24“No, I don’t. I think he’s longing for her to go.”

He was taken aback. “Why d’you think that?”

“‘He who will not when he may, when he will he shall have nay.’”

Dr. Maclean stared at Miss Prince distrustfully. What exactly did she mean by that enigmatic quotation?

“You’re not a fool!” she said tartly. “Harry Garlett’s not the first man who’s made love to a woman—and then been sorry he had, eh?”

“You think there was a time when Garlett made love to Miss Cheale?”

Dr. Maclean’s voice also fell almost to a whisper.

“I’m sure of it! She’s never admitted it, mind you—don’t run away with that idea.”

“I don’t believe Harry Garlett has ever made love to Agatha Cheale,” said the doctor, definitely making up his mind. “I think he’s an out-and-out white man.”

Miss Prince smiled a wry smile.

“I’m positive that something happened lately which changed their relations to one another. Harry’s afraid of her—he avoids her.”

“I’ve never noticed anything of the kind,” said the other brusquely.

Miss Prince looked vexed; no gossip likes to be contradicted, and she proceeded to pay the doctor out.

“Your niece seems to be giving great satisfaction at the Etna factory,” she observed.

“I think she is—I hope she is! Jean’s a good conscientious girl.”

“And so attractive, too! Every one was saying how pretty she looked at the cricket match. Times are changed since we were young, Dr. Maclean. What would my father have said if I’d insisted on being boxed up hour after hour with an old bachelor like Mr. Dodson—or an attractive young married man like Harry Garlett?”

The doctor felt annoyed. What a spiteful woman Miss Prince was, to be sure!

“I don’t think she runs any risk with either of them.” He tried to speak jokingly, but failed.

“How about them?” she asked meaningly.

“Perhaps she’ll become Mrs. Dodson,” he answered dryly. 25But as Mr. Dodson was sixty-four and Jean Bower twenty-one, that didn’t seem very likely.

Lifting his hat, Dr. Maclean walked briskly on his way, telling himself that Miss Prince, like most clever people, was an extraordinary bundle of contradictions—kind, spiteful, generous, suspicious, affectionate and hard-hearted, and a mischief-maker all the time!

The subject of his thoughts hurried on toward the Thatched House. She was precise in all her ways, and she wanted to leave her little gift for Mrs. Garlett, enjoy a short talk with Agatha Cheale, and then get back to her midday meal by one o’clock.

“I’ll see Miss Cheale just for a minute,” she said to the maid—not Lucy Warren—who opened the door. “I suppose she’s in her sitting room?”

Without waiting for an answer Miss Prince went off, with her quick, decided step, through into the house she knew so well.

As the door opened, Agatha Cheale turned round quickly, filled with a sudden, unreasonable hope that it might be Harry Garlett. He had gone to the china factory this morning, though it was Saturday, and he had telephoned that he would be back to luncheon.

But she reminded herself bitterly that he never sought her out now. If he had anything to communicate to her connected with the running of the house, he always made a point of doing so at one of the rare meals they took together, in the presence of the parlour-maid, Lucy Warren.

“I’ve brought a few forced strawberries for poor Emily,” began Miss Prince, and then, lowering her voice perceptibly, she added: “I understand she’s not so well as usual?”

The other looked at her surprised.

“I see no change,” she said indifferently.

And then Miss Prince became aware that the younger woman had been crying.

“Look here, Agatha,” she spoke with kindly authority. “It’s time you had a change! You’re badly in need of a holiday. It’s all very well for Harry Garlett—his life’s a perpetual holiday.”

“He’s been working much harder than usual lately,” the other said quickly.

26There came a gleam into Miss Prince’s eye.

“I think there may be a reason for that,” she said rather mysteriously.

“Any special reason?” asked Agatha Cheale indifferently.

Miss Prince hesitated. This morning, at early celebration, she had resolved that she would make a real effort to cure herself of what she knew in her heart was her one outstanding fault—to herself she called it, quite rightly, sin—that of retailing malicious tittle-tattle. But somehow she felt strongly tempted to say just one word, and, as so often happens with those cursed with her peculiar temperament, she was half persuaded that in saying what she now determined to say she would be doing the right thing.

“Of course you know that Jean Bower, Mrs. Maclean’s niece, has become secretary to the Etna China Company?”

“No, I didn’t know it.” Agatha Cheale was more surprised than she chose to show.

“How very odd of them not to have told you! I mean, how odd of Harry, and how odd of Dr. Maclean. Why, she’s been at the Etna factory for quite a month.”

“I thought the girl was well off.”

“When her father died it was found that he had only left fifteen hundred pounds. And though the Macleans have practically adopted her, she seems to have said she would much prefer to do some work than to be just idle; so Mrs. Maclean, hearing that a secretary was wanted at the Etna factory, managed to catch Harry Garlett at the office one day and asked if he would give Jean a trial. Of course he had to say ‘yes.’”

“I suppose he had,” said Agatha Cheale slowly.

Jean Bower’s attractive, youthful personality had been impressed on her in the cricket pavilion during the great Australian match. She had envied the girl, not only her bright artless charm of manner, but also the warm affection the doctor and his wife had shown her.

“I hear old Dodson is quite bewitched by her, and that even Harry himself is at the factory a great deal more than he used to be,” went on Miss Prince.

“That isn’t true about Cousin Harry.”

Agatha Cheale forced herself to smile, but in her heart she knew that Harry Garlett had gone to the factory oftener 27this last month than he had ever done since she first came to Terriford. As for old Dodson, he was just the kind of foolish old bachelor to be bewitched by a young girl. After being head clerk for a number of years, he had been made a partner, and now practically ran the prosperous business.

Miss Prince looked sharply at her friend.

“Why, just now you said he had been working hard lately?”

“I didn’t mean at the factory.”

“It’s all very well to be unconventional,” went on Miss Prince, “but human nature doesn’t alter. For my part I think it’s a mistake to mix up attractive girls with married men.”

“Mr. Dodson isn’t a married man,” observed Agatha Cheale.

“No, but Harry Garlett is.”

The other made no answer, and Miss Prince suddenly exclaimed triumphantly, “Why, there they are!”

Agatha Cheale turned quickly round.

Yes, Miss Prince was right. Through the window could be seen two figures walking slowly across the meadow, to the right of which stretched the little wood.

“I should have thought that Harry would have had more sense! I don’t wonder they’re already beginning to be talked about,” observed Miss Prince.

“What a lot of disgusting people there are in Grendon,” said Agatha Cheale. There was a note of bitter scorn in her voice. “It’s Saturday to-day. That’s why they’re walking back together. It’s the first time they’ve done it.”

Miss Prince would have been not only surprised but deeply shocked had she been able to see into her friend’s unhappy heart. Agatha Cheale, gazing out on those two who were just coming through the little gate which led from the cornfield into the garden of the Thatched House, had felt a surge of intolerable suspicion and jealousy sweep over her, and that though her reason told her that the suspicion, at any rate, was utterly uncalled-for and absurd.

Miss Prince looked at her wrist watch—one of her few concessions to modern ways.

“I must be going,” she exclaimed; “it’s almost one o’clock.”

28She had only just left the room when there came a knock at the door. “Come in!” called out Miss Cheale, and Lucy Warren appeared.

“You said you wanted to see me before lunch, miss.”

Though the girl was making a great effort to seem calm, her lips were trembling and her eyes were swollen with crying.

29
CHAPTER III
Late that same evening, Dr. Maclean, his wife, and their adopted daughter, were all sitting together in the dining room of Bonnie Doon.

The Macleans had bought the charming old house soon after the doctor had taken over the practice of Miss Prince’s father, and they had renamed it after Mrs. Maclean’s birthplace.

To-night, his wife and niece being by the table, the doctor sat close to the fire smoking his pipe.

“Dr. Tasker popped in to tea to-day,” observed Mrs. Maclean. As her husband said nothing she went on: “He waited quite a long while in the hope of seeing you. I’m doubting, Jock, whether we’ve been quite fair to that young man. He spoke very handsomely of you—he did indeed.”

“I’ve no need of his praise,” said the doctor dryly.

“I didn’t say you had. All the same I hope you’ll not scold me for having asked him to supper to-morrow night. He says Sunday is such a dull day in Grendon.”

“I can’t promise to stay in for him if I’m sent for,” said Dr. Maclean, in a voice which his wife thought somewhat tiresome.

There had been a time, not so very long ago, when it was she, rather than her husband, who had disliked the young medical man who had suddenly “put up his plate,” as the saying is, on the door of almost the last house in Grendon. But Dr. Tasker had spoken to her very pleasantly at the cricket match. He had made friends, too, with Jean, and so Mrs. Maclean was now prepared to take him, at any rate in a measure, to her kindly Scots heart.

For a few moments there was silence in the room. Dr. Maclean turned himself round, and his eyes rested with appreciative affection on the bent head of the girl who even in a few weeks had so much brightened and enlivened his own and his wife’s childless home.

30Jean’s hair was the colour of spun gold, and she had a delicately clear skin, giving depth to her hazel eyes. But her generous-lipped mouth was too large for beauty, and her features were irregular. Yet she looked so happy-natured, intelligent, and healthy, that the general impression produced by her appearance was that of a pretty, as well as that of a very agreeable girl.

Perhaps she felt her uncle’s grateful, kindly glance, for suddenly she looked up and smiled.

“Well, Uncle Jock?” she exclaimed, “a penny for your thoughts!”

“I wonder if I’d really better tell you my thoughts,” he answered rather soberly.

“Of course you must!” cried his wife.

She, too, put down her work for a moment on the table and looked at him.

“I’m thinking,” he said quietly, “that we won’t be keeping our pretty Jean here for long. It’s all very well her being boxed up every day in that china factory. There are always half Saturdays and Sundays, to say nothing of holidays, and young men will soon come courting at Bonnie Doon.”

Jean burst out laughing, but Mrs. Maclean felt vexed.

“Really, Jock,” she exclaimed, “what are you after saying now? I’ve no liking for that sort of joke.”

“He wouldn’t say it if he thought it true,” said her niece merrily. “I’ve been much disappointed in Terriford as regards the supply of young men.”

“Bide a wee, bide a wee,” said the doctor dryly. “A young woman never knows when she’s going to meet Mr. Right; he’s a way of appearing in the most unlikely places.”

Again his wife looked at him severely. “Jock, I’m surprised at you!”

“You’d often be surprised if you could look straight into my mind, woman,” said the doctor waggishly, tapping his pipe against the side of the fireplace. And then, as her aunt was still looking annoyed, Jean tactfully changed the subject.

“I wish you would tell me what you think of Agatha Cheale, Uncle Jock?”

“I wonder what you think of her?” he parried.

“I hardly know her. I liked her the day of the cricket match.”

31“Is that the only time you’ve seen her?” asked Mrs. Maclean.

“I saw her to-day,” said Jean slowly, “Mr. Garlett overtook me after I had started walking home the field way. He suggested I should go through his garden—and then such a horrid thing happened!”

“What happened?” asked the husband and wife together.

“We were going across the lawn when we suddenly heard the sound of crying. It was coming, it seems, from Miss Cheale’s sitting room. Mr. Garlett thought it was a child who had hurt itself, and asked me to go into the house. And then we found that it was Lucy Warren who was crying—and that there was such a horrid scene going on! I’ve never seen any one look as angry as Miss Cheale looked. I thought her such a quiet person.”

Mrs. Maclean asked eagerly: “Why was she angry?”

“From what I could make out,” said Jean, “Mrs. Garlett heard the French window of the drawing room open in the middle of last night. She thought it was a burglar, and she insisted on going downstairs; so she and Miss Cheale went downstairs together, and there was Lucy Warren with a man! But he escaped by the window out into the garden before they could see who it was.”

“I don’t wonder Miss Cheale was angry!” exclaimed Jean’s aunt. “I can hardly believe such a tale of Lucy Warren. She’s such a superior-looking girl, such a pet, too, of Miss Prince’s. Miss Prince was saying to me the other day how sorry she was she had ever allowed Mrs. Garlett to have Lucy, but she felt the Thatched House situation was such a good one that she ought not to keep the girl from it.”

“Lucy will go back to her now. Miss Prince isn’t the woman to let a good maid go begging,” observed Dr. Maclean. “They didn’t say a word of all that to me this morning.” He added, “I couldn’t think what had upset Mrs. Garlett.”

“When we came in, Miss Cheale was trying to get out of Lucy who the man was,” went on Jean eagerly. “But all she would say was that she didn’t see why she shouldn’t have a talk with a friend anywhere she chose. She actually appealed to Mr. Garlett to say if she wasn’t right!”

“What did he say?” asked Mrs. Maclean.

32“In a way he took Lucy’s part, for he reminded Miss Cheale that the drawing room was never used. But of course that only made her more angry—in fact, she was shaking with rage, her face was livid.”

“It was foolish of him to interfere,” observed the doctor.

“Of course I slipped away as quickly as I could,” went on the girl, “but as I went down the passage I heard Lucy call out: ‘I hate you, Miss Cheale! I hate Mrs. Garlett! I hate everybody in this house!’ Oh, it was dreadful—and I felt so sorry for them all.”

Five hours later Jean Bower lay asleep in the big, comfortable bedroom which had been made so pretty for her by her kind aunt. The girl stirred uneasily, for she was dreaming a strange, a terrible, and most vivid dream.

She was at the Etna China factory taking down letters from the dictation of her employer, Mr. Garlett. Though she had been at the factory for a full month Jean had seen very little of the managing director. But they had made friends during their walk from Grendon to Terriford, and in her dream she was enjoying the change of taking down dictation from a man who knew exactly what he wanted to say instead of from weary-brained, hesitating old Mr. Dodson. And then, suddenly looking up, she saw that, pressed against the central pane of the window behind Mr. Garlett was a face convulsed with hatred—and the face was that of Agatha Cheale!

A feeling of icy terror crept over her, for the managing director’s room was on the first floor of the building, far above the ground of the stone-paved courtyard round which the Etna China factory had been built close on seventy years ago.

With a stifled cry the girl awoke and sat up in bed, the horror of her nightmare still so vividly real that her teeth were chattering and her hands trembling in the darkness.

Then there gradually came to her the reassuring knowledge as to why she had dreamed that strange, unnatural dream. It was of course owing to her having seen Agatha Cheale, her face distorted with anger, dismissing Lucy Warren at the Thatched House yesterday morning!

But her feeling of reassurance and relief did not last long, 33for suddenly a stone came crashing in through the window nearest to her. Jumping out of bed she rushed across the room and threw up the lower sash of the window.

“Who’s there?” she called out, and then, “What do you want?”

To her amazement it was Harry Garlett’s voice that called back, “Please forgive me, Miss Bower. I’ve come for the doctor. My wife has been taken seriously ill. I rang the night bell, but could get no answer.”

“The night bell’s gone wrong. I’ll run and tell Uncle Jock at once——”

Leaving the window open, she hustled on a dressing gown and ran down the passage.

“Uncle Jock!” she knocked on the door as hard as she could. “Mr. Garlett has come to fetch you, for Mrs. Garlett has been taken ill——”

Mrs. Maclean opened the bedroom door. “Go back to bed, child; I’ll see to Harry Garlett.”

Reluctantly the girl did as she was bid, for she had the natural desire of youth to be in the middle of anything exciting that is going on.

To Jean Bower Mrs. Garlett was still a mere name, for she had never seen the invalid. But already, though she had only been working on and off with him for a very short time, she had come to like the man every one called Harry Garlett. She was a simple, straightforward, old-fashioned girl. From her point of view all ordinary married people love one another, and she believed her employer to be exceptionally devoted to his ailing wife. There had been a note of extreme anxiety and urgency in the now familiar voice which had come up from the garden just now.

As Dr. MacLean hurried by Harry Garlett’s side along the road leading to the Thatched House he felt a good deal disturbed. Though he had thought his patient more ailing than usual the day before, there had been nothing to indicate anything in the nature of a sudden seizure.

“D’you know exactly when your wife was taken ill?” he asked, aware that his companion’s bedroom was in quite another part of the Thatched House, some way from the rooms occupied by the ailing woman and Agatha Cheale.

34“She was taken ill early in the night. But Miss Cheale thought she’d be able to manage without calling me, and then, suddenly, Emily seemed to collapse! So I dressed and hurried along to fetch you.”

They walked on in silence till they turned in through the gate of the delightful garden which surrounded the house for which they were bound, and as they hastened up the avenue, Dr. Maclean noticed that there were no lights in any of the windows. Agatha Cheale had evidently not seen fit to rouse the servants.

The two men hurried together through the dark hall into the broad corridor which ran through the spacious old house; but at the foot of the staircase the master of the house hung back.

“I don’t think I’ll go up with you,” he exclaimed. “I’ll wait in my study, Maclean. I can’t do any good up there, and it unnerves me to see Emily suffer.”

“All right!” cried the doctor hastily; and he hastened on, familiar with every inch of the way, till he reached the upstairs corridor, which, unlike the lower part of the house, was brilliantly lighted.

All at once he started back—for from behind a big wardrobe there had suddenly emerged an odd-looking figure clad in a drab-coloured ulster.

“It’s only me, sir.” The reassuring words were uttered in a frightened whisper; and with astonishment Dr. Maclean recognized Lucy Warren, the pretty parlour-maid who had got into such trouble the night before.

“Mrs. Garlett’s been moaning something awful,” she murmured, “but she’s left off now. You won’t tell her that you’ve seen me, sir, will you?”

“Not if you’ll go straight back to bed!”

The little incident made an unpleasant impression on the doctor. He told himself that the young woman might at least have gone and seen if she could do anything to help relieve her sick mistress.

And then, as he approached his patient’s room, Dr. Maclean half-unconsciously slackened his footsteps and listened.

But no sound fell on his ear; indeed the silence brooding over the brilliantly lit corridor seemed almost uncanny.

Yet the bedroom door was ajar, and, hearing his footsteps, 35Agatha Cheale opened the door wide, and came out into the passage, a finger to her lips.

She was dressed in a big white coverall. It accentuated the intense pallor of her face and made her slender figure look thicker than usual.

“Mrs. Garlett is asleep now,” she whispered, “but she’s been in awful pain, and I’m sorry I didn’t send for you before. I’ve always been able to manage her in her previous night attacks, but this time she’s been really very bad! I do hope—oh, I do hope, Dr. Maclean, that you won’t think I was to blame not to send for you at once?”

She was so unlike her usual quiet sensible self that the doctor felt alarmed, in spite of himself.

“I don’t suppose I could have done any good if I had come an hour ago,” he said soothingly. “I take it she overate herself last night?”

“She did indeed—that’s what upset her, of course.”

As he moved toward the now open door he told himself, not for the first time, that it was strange that Agatha Cheale, in this one matter of diet, seemed powerless to control his patient. But there it was! Like so many people with delicate digestions, Mrs. Garlett had always had a fanciful, queer, greedy kind of appetite. Sometimes she would eat hardly anything for days together, and then she would grossly overeat herself.

“I suppose,” he said in a low voice, “that you’ve given her brandy?”

“Yes, I have—but it hasn’t done her any good.”

Agatha Cheale still spoke in an agitated, almost hysterical, whisper.

And then, for no particular reason, though he remembered doing so afterwards, Dr. Maclean asked Agatha Cheale a casual question: “Has her husband seen her?”

“No, he thought it best to go off at once for you.”

At last, together, they walked through into the sick woman’s room.

Mrs. Garlett’s bedchamber was the largest in the house, and, like the drawing room below, was somewhat overcrowded with heavy early Victorian mahogany furniture.

Coming out of the brightly lit corridor Dr. Maclean, for a moment, saw nothing, for the one electric lamp which was 36turned on was heavily shaded. But for the fact that he knew where every chair and table stood, he would have knocked into something.

“Do turn on another light,” he whispered rather crossly. “I can’t see at all!”

Obediently she turned on the two naked lights hanging above the dressing-table, but the big curtained four-post bed in which the sick woman lay remained in deep shadow.

“Before I see her, tell me exactly what she ate last night,” said the doctor in a low voice.

Standing opposite Dr. Maclean, just under the two bright naked lights, Agatha Cheale, her face pale and strained, told her story.

“About seven last evening I went to see Miss Prince for a few minutes and, while I was away, from what I can make out Mr. Garlett came up to sit with Mrs. Garlett before dressing for dinner. Unfortunately some forced strawberries which Miss Prince had brought in the morning had been taken up and left in the corridor outside. Mr. Garlett seems to have brought them in here—I suppose to show them to Mrs. Garlett. She said she would like to eat some of them then, before her supper. He stupidly allowed her to do so, and she ate them all—a plateful—with probably a lot of sugar added. So of course I wasn’t surprised when she called out to me about two hours ago that she felt ill!”

“Did she take anything after the strawberries?” asked the doctor.

“Of course she did. She began to feel hungry about 8.30 and then she had her supper—a nice bit of grilled fish and some stewed apples. But her supper didn’t do her any good on the top of the strawberries——”

“I don’t suppose it did,” agreed the doctor dryly. “And now let me have a look at her——”

As he took a step toward the bed Agatha Cheale suddenly put her right hand on his arm.

Surprised, he stopped, and she whispered hesitatingly: “I’ve been wondering—I suppose you wouldn’t like to have a second opinion?”

He shook his head decidedly, secretly very much surprised that her nerve should so far have given way. What good 37could a second opinion do in a case of severe indigestion? Why, the idea was absurd! Then he reminded himself that Agatha Cheale was not a trained nurse—in spite of her war experiences.

He walked quickly across to the sick woman’s four-post bed, lifted the heavy, stiff, silk-lined calendered chintz curtain, and then turned on the light in a reading lamp which stood on a small pedestal table.

Mrs. Garlett was lying on her back in the middle of the big bed, and Dr. Maclean, taking up the lamp, leant for a long, long moment over his patient.

Then he turned, with a blanched face, and still unconsciously holding the lamp in his hand, to the woman who stood waiting over by the dressing-table, the light beating down on her tired drawn face.

“She’s not asleep—she’s dead,” he said quietly.

“Dead! Not dead? Oh, don’t say she’s dead!”

Agatha Cheale’s voice rose into a kind of shriek.

The doctor put the lamp down. He took her hand and held it firmly in his.

“Hush!” he exclaimed, kindly and yet authoritatively. “I’m sorry to have given you such a shock, Miss Cheale, but I’m not so surprised as you seem to be. Her heart was in a very bad state. You have nothing to reproach yourself with—you have been wonderfully good and patient with her, poor soul.”

“Can nothing be done?”

She was looking at him with an extraordinary expression of horror and of pleading on her face.

“Nothing,” he answered gravely.

There was a pause; the doctor dropped the hand he had been holding in so firm a clasp.

“Miss Prince’s dish of strawberries killed this poor woman as surely as if she had taken a dose of poison,” he said grimly.

“You will never let Mr. Garlett know that, will you?” she whispered.

He made no answer, and perhaps she saw by his expression that he was telling himself that even the most sensible women are sometimes foolishly sentimental, for a little colour came back into her face.

38“Shall I go down and tell him—or will you?” she asked, in a voice that had suddenly become composed.

“I’ll tell him, of course.”

To his relief he saw her eyes become suffused with tears.

“We little thought yesterday morning that this would be the solution of your problem,” he said feelingly.

“It’s a horrible, horrible solution!” she exclaimed violently.

Again Dr. Maclean made no answer, for he did not, could not, agree with her. To his mind, the death of Mrs. Garlett was bound to turn out a blessing, not only to the young woman who had tended her so faithfully, if unlovingly, for over a year, but also to the dead woman’s husband.

Hard cases make bad law; Dr. Maclean was no advocate of easy divorce, but to his mind there was something intensely repellent in the marriage of a strong healthy man to a hopeless invalid. Deep down in his heart the honest Scotsman knew what would have happened to himself had he been in the shoes of Harry Garlett. He knew that his flesh and blood would not have borne such a difficult, unnatural situation, and he had long admired the young man’s straight, simple, clean way of life. Thanks to that dish of early strawberries, Harry Garlett would now be able to remake his life on happy, natural lines.

Slightly ashamed of such thoughts coming at such a time, he glanced at the young woman before him. Would she now become the real mistress of this delightful house? The doctor suspected she would make a try for it. But he could not help hoping that the newly made widower would in time meet with a happier fate than marriage with this secretive and, he suspected, very jealous-natured woman. Dr. Maclean liked Harry Garlett well enough to hope that, after a decent interval, this now mournful house would be filled with gay, wholesome, girlish laughter, and the patter of little feet.

And while these secret thoughts were rushing through his brain Agatha Cheale was standing motionless, a look of stark terror on her bloodless face.

“Go into your room,” he said at last, “and try and get a little rest.”

Together they left the room of death, and the doctor 39quickly made his way downstairs through the still, silent house.

Rather unreasonably, it gave Dr. Maclean somewhat of a shock to find Harry Garlett comfortably stretched out in an easy chair, reading a novel. But as the doctor advanced into the room the master of the Thatched House leaped to his feet.

“Well!” he exclaimed, “I hope you’ve made her more comfortable, Maclean? I’m sorry to have dragged you out like this, but Miss Cheale was so very much upset and worried——”

Then something in the gravity of the doctor’s face pulled the speaker up short. He added quickly: “Isn’t she so well? Would you like me to get Tasker?”

Dr. Maclean took a step forward; he put his hand on the younger man’s shoulder:

“Garlett, I’ve a sad thing to break to you, man——”

He waited a moment, then said quietly: “Your poor wife is dead—an obvious case of heart failure following an attack of acute indigestion.”

“Dead?”

As Harry Garlett repeated the word his face became deeply, deeply troubled. “She seemed so well, for her, last evening,” he said slowly.

The doctor answered in a low voice: “You should have resisted her wish for those strawberries.”

Harry Garlett looked puzzled.

“I never gave her any strawberries, Maclean. There are no strawberries yet—it’s much too early.”

It was the doctor’s turn to be surprised.

“I understood from Miss Cheale that you had shown your wife a dish of forced strawberries brought her by Miss Prince, and that then she had insisted on having them before her supper.”

“I never saw any strawberries, and I was only with her for a very few minutes.”

“Then one of the maids must have given them to her,” observed the doctor. “But if it hadn’t been that dish of strawberries, it would have been something else. It’s clear from the state she was in that anything might have caused her death.”

40As if hardly knowing what he was doing, Harry Garlett sat down again.

“I—I can’t believe it,” he muttered.

“As far as the poor soul could be made happy, you made her happy, Garlett,” said Dr. Maclean feelingly.

“I wonder if I did—I wonder if I did! You must have often thought it strange that I was away so much, Maclean. But honestly—it was poor Emily’s own wish.”

He was speaking with deep emotion now, staring down at the floor.

“After I left the army, it took me some time to realize how really ailing she was, though, as you may remember, I did at that time stay at home a good deal. And then one day she sent me a note by hand to the factory——”

He looked up. “That note, Maclean, was my order of release! I have kept it, and I should like you to see it some day. In it she said that she wanted me to be happy—that Dodson was quite up to looking after the business, and that she did not want me ever to feel that I couldn’t do anything which would add to my innocent pleasure in life—because of her state.”

Dr. Maclean was more touched than he would have thought possible.

“Dear me,” he exclaimed, “that was very decent of her!”

“It was,” agreed the other, “it was indeed, Maclean. And she meant every word of what she wrote. It was only yesterday, our thirteenth wedding-day, that she said to me, ‘I don’t like your spending a week-end at home. It doesn’t seem natural, my dear.’ Thank God I did—thank God I did!”

“I think everything has gone very much better here this last year,” said the doctor thoughtfully.

“How d’you mean?”

“I mean because of Miss Cheale.”

The other did not answer for a moment, and then he said in a low voice:

“That’s true in a way, though I don’t think Emily liked Miss Cheale. I have at times regretted having agreed that she should come.”

“They weren’t the kind of women who would naturally take to one another,” answered Dr. Maclean.

41“And yet my wife quite liked that worthless brother of Miss Cheale’s. He actually came to tea with her the other day.”

“Mrs. Garlett always liked men better than women,” said the doctor dryly. He had at once guessed the identity of Lucy Warren’s drawing-room visitor, and it had amused him to picture “poor Emily’s” wrath had she even dimly suspected the fact.

He added, after a pause: “Your wife was a generous sort, Garlett—I mean about money.”

“Yes, she was that, certainly.”

Both men remained silent for a moment. It was true that the poor woman now lying dead upstairs had always shown herself generous about money, though not, excepting to her husband, about anything else. But now was not the moment to recall her cantankerous and narrow outlook on life.

“Well,” said the doctor at last, “I must be going now. I’ll leave a note in her letter-box for Miss Prince as I go by. It will be just as well for Agatha Cheale to have a friend with her this morning; she has had a terrible shock.”

“She must have had,” said Harry Garlett; but he did not speak with his usual hearty kindliness.

The doctor looked at him rather hard. Then he again put his hand on the younger man’s shoulder.

“Look here, my friend, I know you’ve been a good husband to that poor soul. But you’re still a young man, and a new chapter of your life has begun.”

“I don’t feel like that,” muttered Harry Garlett in a low voice.

“Of course you don’t! But still it’s the truth.”

He added, measuring his words: “If I were you I should go away at once, as soon as the funeral is over, for a real holiday—such a holiday as you’ve never had. Don’t come back here till Christmas! Dodson’s getting a very old man; you’ll soon either have to manage the business yourself or get another partner, so take a holiday while you can get one.”

42
CHAPTER IV
Poor Emily Garlett’s funeral took place on a beautiful bright spring morning. The broad sunny street of Terriford was filled with motors and carriages, and quite a concourse of people had come out from Grendon, as well as from the surrounding villages, to testify their respect for popular Harry Garlett, both as famous cricketer and as a generous employer of labour.

Every one saw him, for he followed his wife’s coffin on foot. So also did the various other people closely concerned with the departed lady.

Agatha Cheale was ashen pale, but looked very attractive in her close, nunlike bonnet and severely plain black dress. The few who knew him noticed that Miss Cheale’s brother was not there; but Mrs. Warren could have told them that her lodger had left the farm two days ago, so recovered in health, so blithesome, so merry, that, though still unnaturally thin, he was scarcely the same man as the pale, coughing, queer, and clever gentleman who had come to her last February.

Dr. and Mrs. Maclean, accompanied by their niece, walked a little apart from Miss Prince and Miss Cheale. Lucy was not with the group of servants all clad in handsome black at their master’s expense. She had left the Thatched House the afternoon after Mrs. Garlett’s death, and to-day she had elected to stay at home to mind the farm. This had enabled Mrs. Warren to be present at the funeral, leaning on the arm of her brother, Enoch Bent, head clerk of Mr. Toogood the lawyer.

Little by little the mourners all passed through the lych-gate into the ancient churchyard. The rector had a good voice, and tears rose to many eyes as he read the noble, solemn words of the burial service.

It was remembered afterward that Harry Garlett, though he looked sad, was absolutely composed. When the burial was over he lingered for a few minutes talking to the rector, 43doubtless in the hope that the crowd would disperse. Then he quietly walked down the short, broad village street, and so through into the beautiful garden of the house which somehow he had never quite regarded as his property, if only because it was there that he had first known his wife, and where, as people sometimes unkindly put it, he had “hung up his hat” when he married, instead of taking his bride to a new home.

It is fortunate indeed that men and women cannot read each other’s thoughts, for, truth to tell, during the whole of his wife’s funeral service, Harry Garlett’s mind had been most uncomfortably full of another woman.

To this woman, none other than Agatha Cheale, he had written a formal note that morning saying he would like to see her after the funeral for a few minutes. And now he wondered whether she expected him to go to Miss Prince’s house, where she had been staying the last few days, or whether he would find her waiting for him in the Thatched House in the room which, till his wife’s death, had been known as “Miss Cheale’s room.”

He went into the empty hall, took off his hat, but still wearing his great coat, hurried down the passage. Then, after a moment’s pause, he knocked at the door.

A quiet voice said “Come in,” and as he entered the room he saw Agatha Cheale standing by the empty fireplace. All the little intimate possessions which cause a room to be associated with one personality had been cleared away. Already his late wife’s companion looked, as well as felt, a stranger in this house where she had spent so secretly dramatic, while so openly calm, a year of her life.

And now she gazed with sunken, burning eyes at the man who stood before her. How well he looked, how young, how strong!—his life, which in the last few days she had come to realize would never be shared by her, open before him. Deep in her unhappy, tormented heart there had survived up to to-day a glimmer of hope. True, he had obviously avoided her during the last few days, but might not that be owing to his undoubted affection, or rather respect, for his late wife? Now that faint glimmer of hope died as she gazed into his set, almost stern, face.

There welled up in her heart a terrible tide of that acrid 44bitterness which is born of thwarted love and ambition. But being a brave as well as a proud woman, she only said: “I’m glad it was such a fine day—that makes such a difference to a funeral.” And he answered eagerly: “Yes, indeed!” grateful for her commonplace words.

With an obvious effort, he exclaimed: “I want to tell you how grateful I feel for all you did for my poor wife. Your being here has made all the difference this last year.”

She said nothing, and, speaking more quickly, he went on: “I have to thank you for myself, as well as for poor Emily. It was such an infinite comfort, each time I went away, to feel that I was leaving my wife with someone I could trust, as I knew I could trust you.”

He waited a moment, and as she still remained silent while looking at him with a terrible fixed look of—was it reproach?—he took an envelope out of his pocket.

“I have made up the enclosed cheque,” he said awkwardly, “to the end of the year. I am glad to say Emily left you a thousand pounds. So I do hope you’ll manage to get a good rest before you start work again. From something Miss Prince said the other day, I gather you’re taking a post connected with some kind of Russian business house.”

“Yes,” she said quietly, “they were the people I was with before I came here, and they’ve often asked me to come back. It’s interesting work, and I’m in general sympathy with their objects.”

“Bolshevik objects?” he suggested with a half smile, and without meaning what he said. But she, without a glimmer of an answering smile, replied: “Yes, Bolshevik objects.”

A look of bewilderment came over his open face.

“I had no idea that you and your brother shared that sort of view!” he exclaimed, “deep as I know is your attachment for him.”

“We agree as to politics,” she answered, as if the words were being forced out of her.

And then at last, almost as if reluctantly, she took the envelope from his hand.

“Thank you for this,” she said coldly, “and for telling me of Mrs. Garlett’s unexpected thought for me. I do not want a holiday, but now I may be able to send my brother abroad this next winter, if he lives as long.”

45“I was coming to that,” said Harry Garlett quickly. “I’m going away for a long holiday—certainly till Christmas, perhaps longer. But I’m keeping the household here together, and I’ve been wondering whether your brother would come and stay at the Thatched House as my guest, at any rate through the summer.”

She shook her head.

“I think I ought to tell you, Mr. Garlett, that his coming here is out of the question. I’m afraid, nay, I’m certain, that he was the man Lucy Warren let into the drawing room that night——”

A look of anger and disgust flashed into his face. So she had succeeded in rousing him at last?

She sighed, a weary, listless sigh.

“As I think I told you long ago, my brother’s one real interest in life is what he calls ‘falling in love’—and always with some entirely unsuitable person.”

Harry Garlett softened; he remembered very well his surprise when she had first told him about the unprincipled sickly brother whom she yet loved so dearly, and of whom she was, in a sense, proud.

“I feel grieved,” he said feelingly, “that you have this real anxiety always with you; I wish I could help you with it.”

“No one can help me with it. I knew he was bound to get into a scrape with some woman here.”

“What an extraordinary way to go on!”

“Extraordinary to you, no doubt. But you are a Galahad, Mr. Garlett.”

Her words were like the lash of a whip: he grew red under his tan, and looking at her straight for the first time during this, to him, most trying conversation, “I’m a very ordinary chap,” he said deliberately.

Neither of them spoke for a few moments. Harry Garlett turned and looked unseeingly out of the window. He was longing for the uncomfortable interview to end, and it was with relief that he heard her say:

“I must be going back to the Thatched Cottage now. Good-bye, Mr. Garlett, and thank you for all your kindness.”

“Good-bye and good luck!”

He tried to wring her hand, but it felt like a lump of dead, cold flesh.

46All at once the door opened behind them. “Agatha? Oh, here you are!”

It was Miss Prince.

“I beg your pardon,” she exclaimed, glancing sharply from the one to the other.

“We were just saying good-bye,” said Harry Garlett quickly. “And I’ll bid you good-bye, too, Miss Prince, for I’m going away this afternoon, and I don’t expect to be back this side of Christmas.”

“Good gracious, man! Are you going round the world?”

“I haven’t made up my mind what I’m going to do.”

“And who will look after the factory?”

“Dodson and Miss Bower. Come, Miss Prince”—his look challenged her—“you’ve never credited me with doing much of the work there, eh?”

47
CHAPTER V
Harry Garlett was lying on the bank of a Norwegian fjord. It was a beautiful warm September day. He felt well in soul and body, and intended to give himself three more months’ good holiday.

With just a touch of reluctance he opened a packet of letters which had followed him to this remote, delicious place. Old Dodson’s letter, doubtless a brief dictated summary of what had been happening at the factory, was, as usual, addressed in the girlish handwriting of Jean Bower.

The sight of that handwriting made his thoughts stray for a while to the place which he still called “home.” He was indeed a lucky chap to have such a steady old soul as Dodson, and such a thoroughly nice, sensible young woman as was Jean Bower, looking after the business from which he drew part of his large income.

He opened the envelope and then, as he read the typewritten sheet, his face clouded with deep and even deeper dismay.

Dear Mr. Garlett,
I hope you will not think I am exceeding my duty in writing to tell you that I am becoming very anxious about the state, not only of Mr. Dodson’s health, but also of his brain.

It seems a shame to interrupt your holiday, but I really don’t know what to do. I am supposed to be the only person who has any influence over Mr. Dodson, but I have very little influence indeed, none where the real conduct of the business is concerned. My uncle agrees with me that you ought to know the state of things as soon as possible.

Believe me to remain, yours sincerely,
Jean Bower.
He got up from where he had been lying so luxuriously in the long grass, feeling as if he hadn’t a care in the world. There was evidently nothing for it but to go home and face out a difficult and disagreeable situation. And yet he felt 48sharply annoyed with Jean Bower. No doubt she was exaggerating as to old Dodson’s condition. But there it was; he couldn’t neglect such a letter as that! He told himself that he had been a fool to leave a girl in so responsible a position.

This was why his friends and neighbours welcomed Harry Garlett back in their midst full three months before he had been expected home.

In such a place as Grendon everybody is interested in every other body’s business. As soon as he had come back Harry Garlett had sent off Jean Bower for a short holiday, and soon, to his mingled amusement and annoyance, he found he could hardly take a step down the High Street without some good-natured gossip telling him how splendidly the girl had managed poor crazy old Dodson! Even his head foreman seemed quite lost without her, and, as a matter of fact, things didn’t begin going right again till she came back, and in her quiet and diffident, yet competent, way, began to “put him wise” with regard to all those matters which Dodson had always tried to keep jealously in his own hands.

And then, as the days went on, Harry Garlett began to find himself taking a keen, even an excited, interest in his work. The business which had meant little to him in the old days now gripped and absorbed him, or so he honestly thought, to the exclusion of all else.

Times were bad, every one in the country economizing, going in more and more for the cheap, rather than for the good, and the china made in the Etna works had never been cheap, though always good. And soon it became known in the town that Harry Garlett was trying to prove what even now few people believe—that is, that homely, everyday objects can be cheap and beautiful at the same time.

Never had time gone by so quickly as with these two eager workers! In the old days time had hung sometimes very heavily on Harry Garlett’s hands during the late autumn and winter months. But now he found there were not hours enough for all he wanted to do.

With the brain side of the business increasing at the rate it was doing, it became necessary to engage a new shorthand writer, and at the suggestion of Jean Bower, the daughter 49of a local solicitor killed in the war was given the coveted post. This was considered a kindly and generous act on Miss Bower’s part. Most young women in the position in which she found herself would not have cared to have another girl, younger, most people would have said prettier, than herself, sharing her secretarial position.

But, as a matter of fact, Jean no longer took down letters. Almost at once, though neither she nor Harry Garlett realized it, she had slipped into the position of a partner. They were a happy family at the Etna China works. “All jolly and friendly together,” as the head foreman expressed it.

And then, late in November, a word was uttered which changed, for ever, both their lives.

It was Sunday evening, and Harry Garlett was on his way to supper at Bonnie Doon. He went out often to dinner, having a large circle of acquaintances, but he generally had supper with the Macleans on Sunday, and as it was with him a dull, solitary day he used to look forward very eagerly to the evening. Since his return home, on the pretext that he was still in mourning, he no longer accepted invitations for week-end visits.

To-night, as he passed the Thatched Cottage, Miss Prince came running out of her door; it was almost as if she had been waiting for him.

“Harry!” she exclaimed. “May I walk a few yards with you? I want to ask you a favour.” Inconsequently, she added: “Your wife and I were lifelong friends, you know.”

She began walking along the road by his side, anxious to be quite out of earshot of her maid, who, by the way, was Lucy Warren. Lucy had always been a favourite of Miss Prince, and, to Agatha Cheale’s indignation, after the girl’s dismissal from the Thatched House, she had at once taken her back into her own service.

“Well, Miss Prince, what can I do for you?”

Harry Garlett never felt quite at ease with the gossiping spinster. They had once, years ago, had a real quarrel. He had caught her trying to make mischief between himself and his wife, and though they had formally “made it up” neither really liked the other.

50“If and when Jean Bower gives up her job at the Etna works, I do beg you, Harry, to offer the position to Agatha Cheale.”

“Agatha Cheale?” Harry Garlett repeated the name mechanically.

His whole mind, aye, and his whole heart, were full of the first words she had spoken—“If and when Jean Bower gives up her job——”

“Have you any reason for thinking that Miss Bower is going to give up her position?”

He felt—he could not see, for it was dark—that Miss Prince smiled. It was a smile he knew and had always hated, for it generally presaged on her part the saying of something spiteful and unpleasant. But, whatever it was she was about to say, she now seemed in no hurry to say it.

“Well,” she said at last, “you go to the Macleans so often I should have thought you must have guessed what’s in the wind?”

It was not true that he went often to Bonnie Doon. As a matter of fact he had a curious distaste in seeing Jean Bower in the company of her uncle and aunt, for the reason that they two had now many interests in common that they could not share with outsiders—however kind those outsiders might be.

“In the wind, Miss Prince? I don’t understand what you mean.”

“If you were living where I live, on the road, you’d notice how often Dr. Tasker goes in and out of Bonnie Doon. Why, it’s as good as a play! There was a time when the man would hardly put his foot in Terriford village. We were supposed to belong to Dr. Maclean—and we did, too. There wasn’t much love lost between them before Miss Jean came along—but now they’re kissing kind! I’m expecting to hear of Jean’s engagement to Dr. Tasker any day.”

Harry Garlett fenced with his tormentor. “I now see your point about Miss Cheale,” he said quietly, “but I doubt if she would give up her work in London.”

“She gave it up before to please you.” Her tone was significant, though he could not see her meaning look. She added hastily:

“Agatha is devoted to this place, and so I thought I would 51take time by the forelock. Once it’s known that Jean Bower is leaving the factory, there’ll be plenty of people anxious to work their idle, silly daughters into her pleasant job. If you are wise, Harry Garlett, you will bear Agatha Cheale in mind.”

“I will, indeed, Miss Prince. Thank you for mentioning her.”

Miss Prince turned back toward her house, while Harry Garlett walked on, in a turmoil of astonishment and, yes, of bitter, intolerable jealousy.

Jean Bower and that red-haired brute, Tasker? Why, the mere thought of their names being associated in the way he had just heard it done made him feel beside himself with anger.

He quickened his footsteps, even now unaware of what was the matter with him. Indeed, as he went up the drive leading to the Macleans’ front door, he seriously told himself that his feeling of utter dismay was owing to the loss Jean would be to him from a business point of view.

A most miserable evening followed. Whenever Harry Garlett had a chance of doing so he would stare furtively, his heart full of jealousy and suspicious misery, at Jean Bower’s bright, animated face.

He wondered whether Tasker had been there on Friday afternoon? The day before yesterday Miss Bower had asked for the afternoon off—a most unusual thing for her to do.

Jean? What a lovely unusual name! Till this evening she had been “Miss Bower” even in Harry Garlett’s inmost thoughts. Henceforth she would always be Jean....

He was so silent, so constrained in his manner, that the doctor and Mrs. Maclean noticed that something was wrong. But they were, as Jean’s aunt expressed it afterwards, a hundred miles from suspecting the truth. By both these good people Harry Garlett was still regarded as the newly made widower of “poor Emily,” and as for their dear little niece, they were secretly happy in the belief that she would soon be Mrs. Tasker, settled within a pleasantly easy distance of themselves, with her future assured, even if the young medical man, whom they had regarded with such very different feelings till a few months ago, were not exactly 52a hero of romance. Tasker was proceeding in his wooing in a leisurely, cautious manner, but neither of the onlookers suspected the truth—the truth being that he felt as if there were an invisible, but strong, barrier between the girl and himself.

The next morning Jean was ten minutes late in arriving at the factory. As a rule she was five minutes early. But some one had come to Bonnie Doon with a cut hand, and the doctor, who generally motored her into Grendon, had wished to attend to the injury himself.

Those ten minutes had seemed to Harry Garlett an eternity. That she who was always early should be late, seemed to his jealous, excited fancy to confirm Miss Prince’s outspoken hint, and when at last she did come in, with a half-smiling apology, he turned on her roughly.

“I hope that you won’t be delayed like this again, Miss Bower, however good the reason. It gives a bad example,” and she was frightened, cowed, by his look of mingled anger and contempt.

Each of them got through his and her morning work with difficulty—Jean often on the point of tears.

What had happened to her kind, considerate employer, the man with whom, in her guilelessness, she had thought herself almost on the terms of a younger sister?

At last, at about a quarter to one, he turned on her with: “And what do you see to admire, Miss Bower, in Dr. Tasker?”

It was a monstrous, an outrageous, question, and the colour flew into her face.

She turned away and answered in what she meant should be a cheerful, chaffing voice, though she felt not only astounded, but hot with anger.

“What makes you think I admire Dr. Tasker, Mr. Garlett?”

He said, “I’m told you do,” in a short, cutting voice.

This time she remained silent, and after pretending for a moment or two to be busily engaged in correcting the proofs of a new trade catalogue she put her pen down and turned to walk toward the door—no longer mistress of herself.

53Harry Garlett leaped to his feet, and before she could reach the door he caught her up and masterfully—yet, oh how gently—took her in his arms.

“Jean! Don’t be cruel,” he whispered. “Surely—surely you know I love you—adore you—worship you?”

For a long moment they gazed into each other’s eyes, and then his lips sought and found her soft, quivering mouth....

Early that afternoon—it was the first of December—Jean went home and quietly told her dismayed aunt that she and Harry Garlett loved one another. She admitted that it was very strange that neither of them had known it before to-day, but she went on to say that now they did know it, they were very, very happy.

Poor Mrs. Maclean! For the first time in her life she felt as if she could not cope with a situation—and she prayed for the doctor’s return home.

But when he did come in, tired out, from a difficult case, he only said grumpily: “So that was what was the matter with him yesterday? We were fools not to have foreseen it,” and telephoned to ask Harry Garlett to supper.

How different was this evening from that spent by them all the night before! Even Mrs. Maclean, staid Scots body that she was, caught fire at the great shaft of pure white flame which seemed to envelop those two who had now become lovers.

To her husband she might mutter that it was only just over six months since “poor Emily” died, but to herself she kept saying how wonderful, how uplifting, even only to watch, was this ecstatic passion between a man she had secretly imagined incapable of love, and her matter-of-fact, capable, merry little Jean.

Dr. Maclean was far from pleased. He kept wondering, ruefully, what he should say to Tasker. The man would undoubtedly be bitterly disappointed. Nay, more, he might feel that he hadn’t been treated quite fairly.

The doctor was also uncomfortably aware that there would be “talk,” and almost as if his wife were able to see into his mind, just before Harry Garlett at last got up, Mrs. Maclean suddenly exclaimed:

“There’s one thing I’m minded to say, Harry. I’m afraid 54Jean mustn’t go to the factory any more—not till you’re married, that is.”

As both the girl and her lover exclaimed against the cruel decision, Dr. Maclean clinched the matter.

“Your aunt’s quite right,” he said firmly. “Grendon’s the greatest place for gossip in England.”

“We don’t mind gossip.”

Dr. Maclean looked gravely at the two fine-looking young people standing before him in the lamplight.

Harry Garlett had never looked his age, and now, to-night, he looked years younger than yesterday. As for Jean, not only her radiant face, but her supple, graceful figure seemed transfigured—she looked a lovely ageless nymph no sorrow or decay could touch.

“I fancy that even you would mind being spied on and sniggered at,” said the doctor dryly.

And so there began for those two who loved one another so dearly a strange period of mingled pain and bliss. They hated to be apart, and yet they were not allowed to be together in what seemed to them both the only seemly, natural way—that in their joint everyday work.

Mrs. Maclean showed what even Jean considered an almost absurd fear of what even the people of Terriford might say. She did not like the lovers to stray outside the large garden and paddock of Bonnie Doon, and she ordained that “for the present” the engagement should remain private.

Small wonder that at the end of about ten days Miss Prince asked inquisitively: “Why has Jean left off going to the factory?”

“Jean has only had a few days’ holiday since she first went there,” answered Jean’s aunt evasively.

But Miss Prince shook her head. “I don’t know why you should hide the truth from me, Mrs. Maclean? It’s been plain for a good while what was the matter with Harry Garlett. I knew it before he knew it himself! But I didn’t believe that the girl liked him. I thought she preferred Dr. Tasker. Well, well! Poor Emily has soon been forgotten——”

After some three weeks of this state of things had gone on, Dr. Maclean suddenly said to his wife: “There’s nothing 55for it but to get them married! There’ll only be more talk if they don’t.”

And Mrs. Maclean answered with something like a groan: “There’ll be a lot of talk if they do.”

“Yes, but what’s to be done, my dear? The poor fellow has never been in love till now, so he doesn’t know how to behave——”

And so it was that at last it was decided that the two should be married on the nineteenth of December, by special license, very quietly, not to say secretly, in Terriford village church. They would then go to London for a week’s honeymoon, and, during that week, Dr. and Mrs. Maclean would tell all their neighbours and friends what had happened.

The doctor and his wife reminded each other that there was something about Jean which attracted even cold people. She had such a bright, happy, eager nature. As for Harry Garlett, he was always ready to do anybody a good turn, and also, as a great cricketer, was very popular. Though some old-fashioned people might be shocked by so early a second marriage, every one knew that his late wife had been an invalid for years.

There was only one person to whom, for a reason he would have found it difficult to define even to himself, Harry Garlett felt bound to announce his forthcoming marriage. This was Agatha Cheale.

In answer to his brief letter, there came one even briefer:

Dear Mr. Garlett,

I am interested in your news, and I trust you will be as happy as you deserve to be.

Yours sincerely,
Agatha Cheale.
56
CHAPTER VI
“Iam the most fortunate man in England! I am the happiest man in the world!”

As he swung along in the bright winter sunshine on the field path which formed a short cut to the town, again and again these words seemed to hammer themselves, in joyful cadence, on Harry Garlett’s brain.

What we call the human heart is full of the strangest twists and turnings, and so, though Garlett’s heart was full of Jean Bower, he threw an affectionately retrospective thought to his late wife. He and “poor Emily” had never had a really cross word during those long, quiet years before the war, when, most fortunately for himself, he had not even dimly apprehended what the passion of love can mean in a human life, and how it will make beautiful, and intimately delicious, even the most prosaic facts of day-to-day existence.

He looked at his watch. It was a quarter past ten. In just twenty-four hours from now he and Jean would be starting for their one week’s honeymoon in London.

His face softened. There came upon it a great awe. God! How he loved her. Every moment they spent together he seemed to discover some new, hitherto hidden beauty of mind, soul, or body in this wonderful, still mysterious, but wholly delightful young creature who not only allowed him to worship her but—miracle of miracles—returned his passion.

Such were the disconnected but wholly contented thoughts which filled half an hour of the last easy, unquestioning, and, as if for an immortal moment, ecstatic morning of Harry Garlett’s life.

With no premonition of coming pain or evil Jean Bower’s fortunate lover passed through the big paved courtyard of the Etna China factory. He walked quickly into the 57early Victorian marble-papered hall and so past the office where sat two clerks, into the high square room which had been for so long known to the good folk of Grendon as “Mr. Dodson’s room.”

His letters lay unopened on the shabby leather-covered writing table, and as he sat down he saw that on the top of the pile was an unstamped envelope marked “Private.” Opening it, he read:

The Red Lion, Grendon,
December 17th.
Sir,
I propose to call on you to-morrow at eleven with regard to an important matter. Will you please arrange to be in at that time?

Yours faithfully,
James Kentworthy.
He stared down at the sheet of paper, trying to remember if he had ever heard the name Kentworthy before. But no, it meant nothing to him. Whoever this Kentworthy might be he had no business to take it for granted that he, Garlett, would be here, waiting his convenience, at eleven o’clock!

He got up and went into the outer office.

“If a Mr. Kentworthy calls, I will see him. But say that I can only spare him a few minutes, as I am very busy.”

As it was striking eleven, the door opened with: “Mr. Kentworthy, sir,” and at once, with some surprise, Harry Garlett recognized in his visitor a stranger he had seen walking about Terriford village during the last week or so.

The first time he, Garlett, had noticed him, this gray-haired stout man had been standing in the road just outside the gate of the Thatched House, chatting with one of the gardeners. On another occasion he had seen the same person looking at the inscriptions on the graves in the beautiful churchyard, of which the high-banked wall bounded the top of the broad village street. Also, this man whose name he now knew to be Kentworthy had passed him more than once on the narrow field path along which he had walked so joyously this morning.

“I have only just read your note, Mr. Kentworthy, for I was late this morning. What can I do for you? I’m afraid 58I cannot spare you much time, for, as you see, I haven’t even opened my letters.”

His burly, substantial-looking visitor came forward and stood close to him.

“I may take it that you’ve no idea of the business which has brought me here, Mr. Garlett?”

He looked straight into the face of the man he was addressing, and Harry Garlett felt just a little disconcerted by that steady, steely stare.

“No,” he said frankly, “I have no idea at all of your business, but I have lately seen you walking about Terriford village, so I take it that you have some association with this part of the world?”

“This is my first visit to Grendon,” said the other slowly, “and I was sent here, Mr. Garlett, on a most unpleasant errand.”

Again he looked searchingly at Garlett, and then he went on, speaking in a deliberate, matter-of-fact voice:

“I am a police inspector attached to the Criminal Investigation Department, and I was sent down here, about a week ago, to make inquiries concerning the death of Mrs. Emily Garlett, your late wife.”

Harry Garlett got up from his chair; he was so bewildered, so amazed, and yes, so dismayed, at what the other had just said, that he wondered whether he could have heard those strange, disturbing words aright.

“Concerning the death of my wife?” he repeated. “I don’t understand exactly what you mean by that——?”

James Kentworthy did not take his eyes off the other’s face. Long and successful as had been his career in the Criminal Investigation Department, he had never had a case of which the opening moves interested and, in a sense, puzzled him so much as did this case. He asked himself whether the man now standing opposite to him, whose face had gone gray under its healthy tan, was an innocent man, or that most dangerous and vile of criminals, a secret poisoner?

“From some information recently laid before the Home Office, it seems desirable that the cause of Mrs. Garlett’s death should be fully ascertained,” he said slowly.

Harry Garlett sat down again.

59“On whose information are you acting?” he asked.

“That, for obvious reasons, we are not prepared to divulge,” answered the other coldly. And he also sat down.

Harry Garlett’s mind was darting hither and thither. Curse the gossips of Terriford! He had known them to create much smoke where he had felt convinced there was no fire—but never, never so noisome a smoke as this.

His heart became suddenly full of Jean—his darling, innocent little love. Such a child, too, as regarded the evil side of human nature, with all her common sense and practical cleverness. The thought of Jean almost unmanned him, but, in a flash, he realized that if only for her sake he must face this odious inquiry with courage and frankness.

“What is it you desire to know concerning my late wife’s death?” he asked.

“Although Mrs. Garlett’s death was exceedingly sudden, there does not seem to have been any question of an inquest,” observed the man Garlett now knew to represent all the formidable and mysterious powers of the C.I.D.

“There was not the slightest necessity for an inquest,” was the quiet answer. “Dr. Maclean, who had been my wife’s medical attendant for many years, saw her the day before she died.”

Mr. Kentworthy took a thick, small, notebook out of his coat pocket, and opening it, began reading it to himself.

“I am aware of that fact,” he said, without looking up, “and of course my next step will be to call on Dr. Maclean. But before doing that I thought it only fair to come and tell you of my inquiries, Mr. Garlett.” He looked up. “Have you any objection to giving me an account of your wife’s death—as far as you can remember the circumstances? Let me see—it’s only seven months ago, isn’t it?”

Again Harry Garlett made a mighty effort to pull himself together. He had all your honest man’s instinctive, absolute trust in justice. No one believed more firmly than himself that “truth will out, even in an affidavit,” but even so, though he was not exactly an imaginative man, he did feel as if the gods, envious of the wonderful happiness with which his cup had been filled up to brimming over till a few moments ago, had devised this cruel, devilish trick....

60“I am quite willing to tell you everything you wish to know,” he said frankly. “But there is very little to tell, Mr. Kentworthy.”

“It is a fact, is it not, that your wife was a lady of considerable means, and that she gave over to you the greater part of her fortune quite early in your married life?”

Garlett flushed. “That is so. But I beg you to believe that that was by no wish of mine. In fact, as I can prove to you, I remade my will at once, leaving the money back to her in case I predeceased her.”

James Kentworthy smiled. In spite of himself he was beginning to like Harry Garlett, and even to feel inclined to believe, to hope, he had been sent to this sleepy, old-world country town on a wild-goose chase.

“Look here!” he exclaimed, “I don’t want you to be on the defensive with me, Mr. Garlett. If, as I trust will be the case, these inquiries of mine show that everything occurred in—well, in a regular and proper manner, no one will be more pleased than I shall be. I am not trying to catch you out in any way.”

Garlett’s face lightened. “Thank you for saying that. But—but I feel so bewildered, Mr. Kentworthy.”

“I understand that. Still, in your own interest I beg you to tell me, as clearly as possible, whatever details you may remember as to your wife’s sudden death. I propose to make a shorthand note of all you say, and then, after I have transcribed it, to ask you to read it over and sign the statement.”

He waited a moment, then added:

“I need hardly say that if you would prefer to ask your solicitor to be present, I shall raise no objection.”

“I would far rather say the little I have to say to you alone,” exclaimed Harry Garlett eagerly. “I have a very strong reason for hoping that the matter will never be known to any one but to us two—and, I suppose I must add, to Dr. Maclean?”

“Of course I shall have to see Dr. Maclean,” answered the police inspector. “But now, Mr. Garlett, go ahead! I would, however, suggest that you give orders that we be not interrupted. A great deal depends on your statement, as well as on that of Mrs. Garlett’s medical attendant. If 61they both prove satisfactory, the Home Office will not issue what it is always reluctant to do—an exhumation order.”

“An exhumation order?”

As he repeated those ominous words, there was a tone of utter dismay and horror in Harry Garlett’s voice, and the older man threw him a quick, suspicious glance. Why did the suggestion of an exhumation order cause Emily Garlett’s widower such unease? Then he reminded himself that, after all, an absolutely innocent man might well quail before an ordeal which, whatever the precautions taken, was bound to become public.

“That would obviously be the next step,” he said reluctantly.

Harry Garlett took up the telephone receiver which stood on his writing-table. “I am not to be disturbed on any account,” he called through.

And then, settling himself squarely in his chair, he faced his tormentor:

“Ask me any questions you like, Mr. Kentworthy,” he said, “and I promise to answer them fully and truthfully.”

The police inspector moved his chair a little nearer to the writing-table.

“I understand, from the few inquiries I have been able to make, that Mrs. Garlett was always in delicate health?”

“That is so; indeed my wife may be said to have been born delicate. She told me once that she never remembered feeling really well. Her parents made a very late marriage, and she was an only child.”

“She was a good deal older than you were, was she not?”

Harry Garlett reddened. The fact had always been a sensitive point with him.

“I was twenty-two when I married, and my wife, at twenty-seven, seemed in my eyes still quite a young woman. She was very slender, and, at that time of her life, did not look more than twenty.”

“And I suppose I may assume that it was a marriage of affection on both sides?”

A deeper flush came over Harry Garlett’s face. Though he had an open, cheery manner, he was in some ways a very reserved man. It was, therefore, with obvious, though restrained, emotion that he answered, in a low voice:

62“My mother died when I was a child, and I had no sister. My father failed in business when I was a lad of fourteen, and a godfather paid for my later education. Until I came to Grendon I had hardly ever spoken to a young lady of refinement. At once the Thatched House became to me what I had never known, a home, and its young mistress my—my ideal of womanhood.”

“I see,” said the other man, touched by the candid admissions. “Then I take it, Mr. Garlett, that yours was a love marriage?”

“In spite of my wife’s ill-health, and our disappointment at not having children, I doubt if any married folk ever led a happier and more placid existence than we did—till the war,” answered Harry Garlett earnestly, but, as the other thought, a little evasively.

“My wife took the greatest pride and pleasure in my success as a cricketer. Yet she was so far from strong that, even in the old days, she could seldom sit out a match.”

“I know that you were the third man in Terriford to join up in August, ’14,” observed Mr. Kentworthy, “but that, I take it, did not mean that you were not completely happy at home?”

“Indeed, it did not! I felt that every fit man, in a position to do so, ought to join up at once. As for my wife, she was one of those old-fashioned women who approve of everything their husbands do.”

“Very few of that sort about now,” said Mr. Kentworthy, smiling.

“Well, my wife was one of those few! I told her how I felt about it all, and she said no word to stop me. And yet I have every reason to believe that she went through a real martyrdom while I was at the front——” He waited a moment, then concluded: “And when the war came to an end, and I settled down at home again, I realized that she had become a permanent invalid.”

“A terrible thing for a man of your age,” observed Mr. Kentworthy thoughtfully.

Harry Garlett made no answer to that comment. Had he ever felt for poor Emily a tithe of what he now felt for the girl who was to become his wife to-morrow, the condition in which he had found her on his return home would indeed have been a terrible thing. But with Emily, his relations, 63though good, kindly, even in a sense, gratefully affectionate, had not been such, even before the war, as greatly to affect him. But that, after all, was entirely his own and most secret business.

Thank God—he was thinking of Jean now, not of Emily—he had played fair in the great game of life. Tempted? Of course he had been tempted. Once, at least, more fiercely than he cared to remember now. But he had fought, beaten down temptation, remaining not only in deed but even in word, faithful to his marriage vow.

He came back with something of a mental start to the matter in hand.

This was the first time he had ever spoken, in an intimate sense, of his married life to any human being, and he was surprised to feel that, instead of finding it difficult, it was, in a sort of way, a relief.

“People may have told you, Mr. Kentworthy, that my wife was not a good-tempered woman,” he said earnestly, “but all I can say is, she was the most devoted and generous-natured of wives to me. I am aware that among my neighbours I was criticized for being a good deal away from home. No doubt I was selfish, absorbed in the game to which I give so much of my life during the summer months, but it was always with her eager encouragement that I went about and lived the kind of life I did live.”

“Mrs. Garlett must have been a most exceptional woman,” said the other, and he spoke with no sarcastic intent.

“She came of a long line of high-minded, God-fearing people—her old father was proud of the fact that he was descended from a man who at one moment had been Cromwell’s right hand.”

He, Harry Garlett, hadn’t thought of that for years. Yet, what was perhaps more singular, poor Emily’s personality, at once so commonplace and yet, in a sense, forceful, became suddenly more present to him than it had ever been since the last time they had talked together, on the evening of their thirteenth wedding-day.

“I may take it that there was never even a passing cloud on your married life?”

“Never a cloud!”

Harry Garlett added impulsively, “I don’t want you to 64think me a better man than I am. I did not always find it an easy situation——”

The other cut him short: “I accept what you said just now—that you two were happier, if anything, than the average married couple?”

“Yes, I think we were—in fact, I’m sure we were.” He spoke with sober decision.

“Now, tell me something about last spring. Did you think Mrs. Garlett more ailing than usual?”

“No,” said Garlett frankly, “I did not. She always made an effort to appear bright during the comparatively short times we were alone together, but, as I have already told you, she had become a complete invalid.”

He went on in a rather lower tone: “I wonder if you will understand when I tell you that she treated me, of late years, more as a loving mother treats a dear son than as a wife treats her husband——”

Both men remained silent for a moment, and the police inspector made a note in his book.

“Now, concerning the night your wife died? I understand the date was May the 28th, the time early on a Sunday morning.”

“The 27th of May was the thirteenth anniversary of our wedding-day,” began Harry Garlett. “And I’m ashamed to say I had forgotten it. But my wife remembered. And I found a gift, as a matter of fact, this gold cigarette case”—he took a small plain gold case out of his pocket—“waiting for me on my breakfast plate that Saturday morning. I then altered a plan I had made for going away for the week-end, and I decided to come home at one o’clock and spend as much of the day as was possible with my wife.”

“You were not alone during that walk back to your house?” suggested Mr. Kentworthy, in an indifferent tone. “You were, I believe, with a young lady.”

“A young lady?” echoed Harry Garlett, surprised. “I don’t think so.” And then suddenly he exclaimed: “You’re quite right—but how very odd that any one should have remembered it! I walked back with Miss Bower, the niece of my wife’s medical attendant, Dr. Maclean. But she went on to her home—she lives with the Macleans—and I had a tray lunch upstairs, with my wife.”

65“Were you at home all that afternoon?”

Again it was as if Harry Garlett were making an effort to remember.

“I think so,” he said slowly. “No, I’m wrong! I went to a tennis party. My wife generally rested in the afternoon. But I was back a little after six o’clock, and I sat with her for some time.”

He knitted his brows, trying hard to remember what had happened, and slowly half-forgotten incidents started into life.

“There was a question of some fruit, some forced strawberries that a friend had brought that morning. The lady who was then acting as our housekeeper and as my wife’s nurse, thought I had given Mrs. Garlett the strawberries in question. But that was a mistake. She certainly ate them, so one of the maids must have given them to her. The matter is of some moment, for, as Dr. Maclean will, I think, tell you, it was this fruit which indirectly led to her death. Strawberries generally disagreed with her, but she was very fond of them, and as these were small Alpine strawberries I suppose she thought it would be all right.”

“When did you first become aware of your wife’s serious condition?”

“It must have been about four o’clock in the morning when Mrs. Garlett’s nurse-companion called me. She said my wife was in great pain and had asked if she could have some morphia. So I dressed and went at once for the doctor, who lives about a quarter of a mile from my place.”

“And then?”

“I had some trouble in rousing Dr. Maclean, but I think we were back in my house well under half an hour——”

“Had Mrs. Garlett become worse?”

“My wife could not bear for me to see her in the sort of state in which I understood she was then. So I waited downstairs in my study, and about—well, I don’t think it could have been more than twenty minutes after he had come into the house, Dr. Maclean came down and broke to me the fact that she was dead.”

“Had she died while you were fetching the doctor?”

“I don’t know—I don’t think so. I was terribly upset, and I asked no questions. Though she was an invalid, she 66always seemed, in a way, full of life—a steady, if a low, flame. And she had seemed so well, so happy, that afternoon! But wait a bit. I have forgotten something. My wife had had a disagreeable shock. One of our servants had admitted her sweetheart into the house the night before—as a matter of fact into the drawing room, which has a French window opening into the garden. Mrs. Garlett heard sounds, and thought there were burglars in the house. She actually went downstairs herself, and caught the girl red-handed, as it were. I remember suggesting to Dr. Maclean that the shock—for she was very particular about such things—might have affected her heart. But he didn’t think so.”

He stopped speaking. Mr. Kentworthy was busily writing, and Harry Garlett stared at his visitor’s bent head. Though assuring himself that it would be “all right,” he felt an eerie feeling of apprehension wrapping him round.

“I thank you for the straightforward way in which you have answered my questions,” said the police inspector, getting up from his chair, “and now I propose to see Dr. Maclean.”

“Would you like me to make a telephone appointment for you with him?” asked Garlett. “He’s a very busy man.”

“Why, yes, I should. But I hope you won’t think it unreasonable of me to ask you to give him no hint as to my business?”

“You will hear everything I say to him,” answered the other quickly.

He took his telephone receiver off. “Put me through to Dr. Maclean’s house.”

James Kentworthy, who was now standing close to the writing-table, heard the answer: “Miss Bower is already on the line, sir; we told her you didn’t want to be disturbed—shall I put her through?”

“Yes, please.”

And then, unmindful of the presence of a stranger, more unmindful no doubt because James Kentworthy was still so entirely a stranger to him, Harry Garlett put his whole heart into the question he breathed into the receiver.

“Is that you, my dearest?” And then—“I want to speak to the doctor.”

The other heard, as from afar off, a bright, happy voice 67exclaim: “He’s in the meadow with Aunt Jenny! I’ll run along and get him. But you’d better hang up the receiver, for I’m afraid it’ll be full five minutes.”

Garlett hung up the receiver, and again faced his visitor.

“I should like to tell you, Mr. Kentworthy, that I am just about to be married.”

“Just about to be married?”

The police inspector wondered if he had kept out of his voice, not only the surprise, but the dismay which he felt at this to him astounding disclosure.

“My fiancée is the niece of Dr. Maclean. She was on the telephone just now.”

“The young lady who, for a while, was your secretary?”

In spite of himself, there was a note of deep disappointment in the voice in which Mr. Kentworthy asked the question.

Harry Garlett instinctively straightened himself.

“Miss Bower became secretary to the Etna China Company—not my personal secretary—just before my wife’s death.”

There was an awkward silence between the two men.

“I see,” said Mr. Kentworthy at last. “I see, Mr. Garlett.”

But, as a matter of fact, he felt as if he had walked from the bright sunshine into an evil-smelling fog. Quite a number of pages in his thick little notebook bore the heading “Miss Jean Bower.”

“Is the date of your wedding fixed?”

“Well, yes, it is.” Harry Garlett hesitated, then exclaimed impulsively—“We are to be married to-morrow morning, by special license! No one, however, knows that fact excepting the vicar and his wife, and, of course, Dr. and Mrs. Maclean.”

Again there followed a strange, painful silence.

“I take it you will postpone your marriage till this matter is thoroughly cleared up?” said the police inspector at last.

As the younger man, dismayed, made no immediate answer, the other added: “I should do so, in your place, Mr. Garlett.”

Before he could speak the telephone bell rang and Harry Garlett took up the receiver and in a falsely cheerful tone—a 68tone with which, alas, James Kentworthy was painfully familiar as a result of his life work—he called out: “Is that you, Dr. Maclean? Garlett speaking. Would you be in if Mr. Kentworthy, a gentleman who wants to see you, on urgent private business, were to come along now? Yes? Right!”

He hung up the receiver. “Dr. Maclean will see you at once.”

Both men got up.

“One word before you go, Mr. Kentworthy.”

“Yes, Mr. Garlett?”

Try as he might, he could not bring back the kindly tone into which he felt he had been betrayed during the latter part of their conversation.

“I suppose the only thing that would set the matter absolutely at rest would be the exhumation of my wife’s body?”

“That is so—obviously,” answered the other, briefly.

69
CHAPTER VII
Within an hour of his having left the Etna factory, James Kentworthy got up from his chair in Dr. Maclean’s consulting room.

The man who had come down to Terriford to make these delicate inquiries was honest and conscientious, set on finding out the truth and nothing but the truth. Also, this was to be his last official investigation, and he had every reason for hoping that it would be a short business. The moment it was over he was to retire from the service and start for himself as a private inquiry agent. He was, therefore, sincerely glad that the conversation he had had with the late Mrs. Garlett’s medical man had been, from his point of view, thoroughly satisfactory.

During the first few minutes of his interview with Mr. Kentworthy, Dr. Maclean had been so indignant and so shocked when he realized his visitor’s business, that he had been very unwilling to give the police inspector any information. But he had soon realized that this was a mistake on his part, and by the end of their conversation the two men were on excellent terms the one with the other.

And now that their long talk was, as they both thought, drawing to an end, Dr. Maclean said earnestly:

“I do hope, Mr. Kentworthy, that I have been able to convince you not only that Mrs. Garlett died a natural death, but that my friend Garlett himself was for long years an exceptionally good husband to the poor, sickly woman?”

“You have convinced me,” said the inspector frankly, “that Mrs. Garlett’s death was almost certainly a natural death. But I cannot pledge my superiors in any way, and the best thing would be for you to come with me to London to-night and see the gentleman in charge of the case to-morrow morning.”

Dr. Maclean stood up.

70“There’s one more thing I feel you should know, though it has nothing directly to do with the matter in hand.”

Mr. Kentworthy stiffened into quick attention.

“My wife’s niece, Jean Bower, is just about to be married to Harry Garlett. As a matter of fact, the wedding has been fixed to take place to-morrow——”

A quick inward debate took place in the Inspector’s mind. Should he imitate the other’s frankness? He made up his mind that it was his duty to do so.

“I am aware of that, Dr. Maclean, for Mr. Garlett told me the fact himself. I hope you won’t be offended when I say that I regret very much that he did not wait a little longer. After all, it’s a very short time since Mrs. Garlett’s death.”

“She died in May, and we are now in December!” exclaimed the doctor with some heat. “And remember—I speak as from man to man—that the woman had been Garlett’s wife only in name for many a long year.”

“I do remember that,” said James Kentworthy slowly. “But ask yourself, Dr. Maclean, how so quick a second marriage would strike ordinary people—who knew nothing of the special circumstances of the case?”

“But every one here, in this neighbourhood, does know the circumstances,” objected the doctor.

Each word this stranger had uttered in the last few moments had been said again and again in the last month by Dr. Maclean to his wife. But he was not going to admit anything of the sort now, even to himself.

Hardly knowing what he was doing he sat down again, and Mr. Kentworthy did the same.

Leaning forward, the police inspector said earnestly: “You must remember, sir, that what we, in our line of inquiry, are always looking for, is—motive.”

“Motive?” repeated the doctor. “I don’t quite follow what you mean, Mr. Kentworthy.”

“I need not tell you—a doctor—that in the vast majority of cases the death of a man or woman is always of interest, and very often of considerable benefit, to some human being?”

“I see your point,” said the other uneasily.

“In this case,” went on Mr. Kentworthy, “I soon realized that money had played no part at all in the matter I had been sent to investigate.”

71He stopped abruptly, hardly knowing how to frame the unpleasant fact he wanted to convey.

At last he said frankly: “You must admit, doctor, that Mrs. Garlett’s death released her husband from a very trying position. It made him a free man.”

“That’s true. Yet I ask you to believe me, Mr. Kentworthy, when I tell you most solemnly that Harry Garlett never longed, even unconsciously, for that sort of freedom. He is a man’s man in daily life; he never seemed in the least interested in women; and there was never the slightest breath of scandal about his name.”

The police inspector looked at him gravely.

“I am sorry to say that you are mistaken, Dr. Maclean. You are evidently not aware that there has been a great deal of gossip, not only since Mrs. Garlett’s death, but even before her death, concerning Mr. Garlett and the young lady to whom he is now engaged.”

Dr. Maclean jumped up from his chair.

“I deny that! I deny it absolutely!”

His eyes flashed, he struck his writing-table with his hand.

“What devils some women are! Why, my poor little niece had only just become secretary to the Etna Company when Mrs. Garlett died——”

“She took over her new duties on the 26th of last April,” observed the inspector quietly, “and, from what I can make out, there seems no doubt that Mr. Garlett, who up to then had much neglected his duties as managing director, leaving everything, it appears, to his partner, a certain Mr. Jabez Dodson, began going daily to the Etna China factory.”

Dr. Maclean sat down again. He felt far more disturbed than he would have cared to acknowledge, even to himself.

“I suppose,” he said slowly, “that it would not be fair to ask you the source of this absolutely untrue and poisonous gossip?”

“I don’t say it would be unfair—but I am sure you will understand that it would not be right of me to oblige you.”

“Do you mind telling me exactly what it is you have heard?—narrowing down the point to what you have been told happened before Mrs. Garlett’s death?”

Mr. Kentworthy began to feel sorry he had said anything 72about that side of his investigations. He had been tempted into indiscretion by his liking for this man, and his growing conviction that Harry Garlett’s wife had died an absolutely natural death.

It was as a friend of these foolish, if honest, people that he had just said what he knew was true. After all, it was perhaps just as well that they should know the kind of gossip floating about.

“The most serious thing I have heard,” he said quietly, “is that your niece and Mr. Garlett occasionally met secretly, late at night, in a little wood which forms part of Mr. Garlett’s property.”

Dr. Maclean stared at the speaker with growing anger and astonishment, and the other, pursuing his advantage, as even the kindest men are sometimes tempted to do, went on—

“I have actually spoken to the person who saw them there on at least two occasions.”

Again Dr. Maclean got up. “You have actually found a man or woman who declares that he or she saw my niece, Jean Bower, and Harry Garlett, under the compromising circumstances you have described?”

“No,” exclaimed the other quickly. “I cannot say that the person in question mentioned Miss Bower. What she said—I admit it is a woman—was that she had twice seen Mr. Garlett and a young lady in the wood forming part of the Thatched House property, and that, on the second occasion, she overheard something like an altercation between the two. Garlett’s companion burst into tears and reproached him, from what I can make out, for his coldness to her.”

“Good God!” exclaimed Dr. Maclean.

He sat down again, heavily. He felt suddenly years older.

“Having said so much, I think it is only fair to you to read the exact words I put down after seeing the young woman in question.”

“Young woman? Then the author of this infamous lie is not Miss Prince?” said the doctor to himself as he listened to the inspector beginning to read from his notebook.

“It was one day late in April, I cannot fix the date. When I got to the little wood I saw Mr. Garlett and a young lady walking down the path. I did not want them to see me, so I hid behind 73some laurels. I think from what I could make out, they were talking about the war. There was no love-making that I could see.”

“You must understand,” explained Mr. Kentworthy, looking up, “that the person in question did not give me this connected account that I have read out. I had more or less to drag out of her these apparently unimportant details.”

“There is nothing there about a quarrel or tears,” observed the doctor.

“We are coming to that,” said the other quietly.

“It must have been exactly a week later,” he read on, “that I was there again. I wondered if I should see them, and sure enough I did! It was a moonlit night, so I could see their figures clearly. I couldn’t hear much of what they were saying, for I was afraid of going too near, owing to its being so much more light than it had been the time before, but I did hear Mr. Garlett speaking as if he thought it was wrong of them to be there together at all. He begged the lady’s pardon ever so many times, and seemed a good deal distressed. As for her, she was sobbing bitterly, and kept saying, ‘I am very tired, or I shouldn’t be upset like this.’”

“I may as well read you the impression the story made on me at the time,” said Mr. Kentworthy, and he went on with his notebook:

“I pressed her again and again to give me some indication of who the young lady was. I cannot believe her assertion that it was a stranger to her. But she persisted in her statement that though she knew the man was Garlett she did not know his companion. If this is true it follows that Garlett’s companion was some woman who had come out either from Grendon or perhaps from an even greater distance to spend an hour with him. Note: Make inquiries as to how he spent his time, and with whom, during his frequent absences from home before his wife’s death.”

“You cannot be surprised,” he added looking up, “that I feel everything points to Mr. Garlett’s companion in the wood having been the young lady with whom he is now on the eve of marriage.”

“I suppose I can’t expect you to agree with me,” said Dr. Maclean, “when I say that I am convinced that the story is entirely false from beginning to end. I know my niece never met Harry Garlett secretly at night, or, for the matter 74of that, in the daytime. Only his own admission would make me believe that Garlett met any woman in such compromising and dangerous circumstances.”

Mr. Kentworthy remained silent. It was clear he did not accept the other man’s view of the story.

Suddenly the doctor pressed the electric bell on his table, twice, sharply: “I’m going to send for my niece,” he exclaimed.

Mr. Kentworthy started up.

“That’s not fair,” he cried. “That’s not playing the game!”

“Bide a wee, man. I’m not going to do anything unfair. I simply want you to see the child. I’ll give her a message for my wife.”

A moment later the door opened and Jean Bower ran in.

“Yes, Uncle Jock? What——” and then she stopped short. “I beg your pardon. I did not know you had any one here.”

“Mr. Kentworthy—my niece.”

The two shook hands, and as he looked keenly into her fresh guileless face and noted, as only a trained eye would have done, the dozen little details which go to differentiate one type of modern girl from the other, James Kentworthy told himself that Dr. Maclean had shown a sure instinct in thus obliging him to see Harry Garlett’s betrothed.

The experienced police inspector was not a susceptible man, and he was one whose work habitually caused him to see the ugliest side of feminine human nature. Yet he would have staked a great deal on the probability that the girl now before him was as pure and essentially simple-hearted as had been the mother whose memory he cherished. He made up his mind that Harry Garlett’s mysterious companion had almost certainly not been this young woman.

“I want you to tell your aunt, my dear, that I have unexpectedly got to go to town to-night.”

“Oh, Uncle Jock!”

Jean looked very troubled and dismayed. “I’d better ’phone to Harry at once, hadn’t I?”

“Yes, do, my dear. But first tell your aunt. She’d better send a note to the vicar—that is if you want me to be present at your wedding.”

75She reddened deeply. How very strange and odd of Uncle Jock to speak of to-morrow’s secret ceremony before a stranger.

“Of course we want you to be there. Why, we shouldn’t feel married if you weren’t there! We’ll put the wedding off for a day or two.”

She tried to speak lightly and, turning, left the room.

“There!” exclaimed Dr. Maclean. “D’you see that girl meeting a married man in a wood at night? She’s the most self-possessed, dignified little lassie I’ve ever met! Not that she is lacking in feeling. She’s devoted now, to that man, and,” he went on, speaking with a good deal of emotion, “I hope to God she will never know of this horrible, if it was not so serious I should say this ridiculous, business.”

Suddenly the telephone bell on his table rang. He took up the receiver.

“I said I was not to be disturbed”—and then in a very different voice—“Garlett?”

“Has the man who called on me this morning gone? I feel I must see you.... Yes, I’m still at the office. Where else should I be?... Somehow the horror of it all seems to grow and grow on me.... For the first time in my life I feel as if I don’t know what I ought to do!”

The doctor felt dismayed. It was clear that the invisible speaker was painfully excited and overwrought.

“I don’t think there’s anything to worry about,” he called back soothingly. “My interview with Mr. Kentworthy has been quite satisfactory, and I’m going up to London to-night to see the people concerned to-morrow morning. Best not say too much over the telephone, my dear fellow. Bad breaks will come in business, as we all know.”

He hung up the receiver.

“Garlett’s thoroughly rattled!” he exclaimed. “D’you see any objection to his coming up with us to-night and going to the Home Office to-morrow morning?”

The other hesitated.

“Frankly, I shouldn’t advise that. If you, as Mrs. Garlett’s medical attendant, can convince my chiefs that she died a natural death, the whole matter will be dropped.”

“I understand that, and I’ll make him follow your advice,” said the doctor. “But what I can’t make out—what I would 76give a good deal to know—I suppose you know and won’t tell me?—is what started this damnable inquiry?”

The eyes of the two men crossed.

“There are such things as anonymous letters,” observed Mr. Kentworthy dryly.

“Anonymous letters?”

Surprised though he felt, he told himself that he had been a fool not to think of that solution of the mystery.

“I didn’t know,” he muttered, “that poor Garlett had an enemy in the world. But I suppose you can’t run any business without making some bad blood.”

“I suppose you can’t,” agreed the other. “But one thing I will tell you. The letters in question were never written by a factory hand.”

He leant forward and instinctively lowering his voice, he went on:

“Can you think of any one who bears Mr. Garlett a grudge? Having said so much I think I may go a step further and say that we have no doubt at all that it is a woman.”

“A woman?”

Again the doctor’s suspicions swung around to Miss Prince.

“I understand that before his wife’s death Mr. Garlett went about a great deal?” went on the other thoughtfully.

“That’s true. Garlett’s a very good fellow, and very popular. As a famous cricketer he knew people more or less all over England, and the only kind of business he really did for the Etna China works was that of sometimes acting as a sort of glorified commercial traveller.”

“That being so, Dr. Maclean, don’t you think it possible that he may have formed some kind of connection which he gave up as, queerly enough, a good many men do give up such friendships after a wife’s death?”

“In this strange world of ours,” said the doctor reluctantly, “everything is possible. But I would have staked a good deal that that particular thing was never true of Harry Garlett. I take it you have seen the anonymous letters in question?”

The police inspector quietly opened his black attaché case.

“I see no reason why I should not show the letters to you 77now!” he exclaimed. “I feel certain the originals will be submitted for your inspection at the Home Office. I, of course, have only a set of facsimiles.”

The doctor’s face, which had been very grave, livened into eager curiosity.

Mr. Kentworthy came up to the writing table.

“This was the first letter. It was not addressed to the Home Office. It was sent to Scotland Yard.”

While he was speaking he had put his hand over the sheet of paper; now he lifted it, and Dr. Maclean saw a large sheet of paper marked I. Drawn in pencil was a curious conventional design, under which ran the words—“Water-mark of the original (foreign) paper.”

Then, written in block letters in very black ink, he read the following:

THE WRITER FEELS IT HIS DUTY TO DRAW THE ATTENTION OF THE HEAD COMMISSIONER OF POLICE TO CERTAIN MYSTERIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE DEATH, ON THE 28TH OF LAST MAY, OF MRS. EMILY GARLETT AT THE THATCHED HOUSE, TERRIFORD VILLAGE. MRS. GARLETT WAS THE WIFE OF HENRY GARLETT, OWNER AND MANAGING-DIRECTOR OF THE WELL-KNOWN GRENDON ETNA CHINA FACTORY. THOUGH THE DEATH WAS VERY SUDDEN, NO INQUEST WAS HELD.

“This reads like a man’s letter,” observed Dr. Maclean.

“It was meant to read like a man’s letter,” said Mr. Kentworthy. “But we believe it to be the work of an educated woman.”

The doctor went on staring at the sinister epistle. What dread secret of love or hate—or was it only poisonous malice—lay behind these roughly ink-printed words?

“Here is the envelope. You will notice that the postmark, which by the way has been drawn in, for it was too obliterated for any other method to be of use, shows the letter to have been posted in London just a month ago. For what it is worth I may remind you that almost any educated man would realize that such a communication should be sent to the Criminal Investigation Department of the Home Office, and not to Scotland Yard.”

“What happens,” asked Dr. Maclean, “when such a thing as this is received?”

78“By long experience we are well aware that such a letter is likely to be only one of a series—and sure enough, four days later, came this second letter!”

The speaker pushed aside the first sheet of paper he had laid down, and put in its place another.

“This surely is from an uneducated person?” exclaimed Dr. Maclean.

He was now gazing at a most peculiar looking script, marked 2.

“Not necessarily,” said Mr. Kentworthy. “But whether written by the same individual or not, this was undoubtedly written with the left hand. It is extremely difficult for any handwriting expert, however clever, to identify a letter written with the left hand with the writer’s ordinary right-hand script. There are as a rule certain similarities, but those proceed from the brain rather than from the mechanical action of the hand.”

“I think I understand what you mean,” and, bending down, he read the following long comma-less sentence:

It’s a shame the police took no notice of what happened at The Thatched House when poor Mrs. Garlett died she died in agony her husband was carrying on at the time with more than one girl the doctor’s niece could tell you why poor Mrs. Garlett’s doctor made no fuss people have asked why no inquest echo answers why?

“What an abominable thing!”

Dr. Maclean’s eyes flamed with anger. “I hope to God that neither my niece nor Harry Garlett will ever see this vulgar, hateful letter.”

“I can reassure you on that point,” said the other earnestly. “Under no consideration are these kinds of communications brought into a law case,” and, as he saw a shadow pass over the doctor’s face:

“Not that I think there will be a law case. Since my talk with Mr. Garlett this morning, and with you during the last hour, I believe that all this trouble has been caused by some hysterical woman who has a grudge against Mr. Garlett.”

Dr. Maclean muttered: “I only wish I had the writer of this letter here.”

“Perhaps you’d rather not see the other letter?” said his visitor, half smiling.

79Human nature was always surprising James Kentworthy, and now he was amused in spite of himself. Dr. Maclean had taken the first anonymous letter calmly, but the moment he himself had been brought into the matter he had evidently felt very differently.

“Of course I’d rather see it!” he exclaimed brusquely, and the police inspector put it down before him.

No. 3 was written in block letters.

THE WRITER OF THE LETTER DATED NOVEMBER 25TH ADVISES THE HEAD COMMISSIONER OF POLICE TO ASK MR. HENRY GARLETT TO RENDER A FULL ACCOUNT OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING HIS WIFE’S DEATH.

“I think,” said Dr. Maclean hesitatingly, “that I know who wrote two of those letters.”

“You do?” Mr. Kentworthy leaped to his feet.

“I suspect,” said the doctor, “that the writer is a certain Mary Prince, the daughter, I am sorry to say, of the medical man from whom I bought my practice.”

“The lady who lives at the Thatched Cottage?”

Mr. Kentworthy felt sadly disappointed. He was convinced the doctor was on a wrong track.

“I feel sure it is she,” Dr. Maclean spoke with growing energy and conviction. “Miss Prince is a most malicious woman. She has never liked Harry Garlett, and I know she has been genuinely shocked at his thought of remarriage. She actually guessed how things were between him and my poor little niece before they knew it themselves.”

“Believe me, you are on the wrong track, Dr. Maclean. I had a talk with this very lady two days ago, and though I don’t think she has a pleasant disposition, if she is really the writer of these letters then she entirely took me in.”

“Did she know why you were here?” asked Dr. Maclean.

“Good heavens, no! I hope you won’t be shocked when I confess that I told her I was distantly related, through her mother, to the late Mrs. Garlett. On the strength of this statement she asked me to tea, and we had a long talk. She is a shrewd, clever woman, though I admit a dangerous gossip. By the way, there is one person who, I gather, was actually with Mrs. Garlett when she died. I mean a certain 80Miss Agatha Cheale, who is a friend of this Miss Prince. How about her, Dr. Maclean?”

Unconsciously the doctor stiffened.

“I don’t know that there is anything to say about Miss Cheale. She was distantly related to the Garletts. Mrs. Garlett’s death was a real misfortune for her, for although the poor lady left her a thousand pounds, she was actually receiving a salary of three hundred pounds a year.”

“When was she here last?” asked Mr. Kentworthy suddenly.

“She came down for a week-end visit to Miss Prince about a month ago, and I think she is coming for Christmas. A capable, intelligent young woman, but I don’t think she could add anything to what I have told you—the more so, that although she was in a war hospital in France, she is not a trained nurse.”

“Well, I’ll be going now. Shall we meet at Grendon station at five o’clock and travel together?”

“By all means.” The two men shook hands cordially.

“I hope you will be able to forget all about this business after to-morrow,” said the police inspector earnestly.

But Dr. Maclean felt very sick at heart when he finally shut the door on his unwelcome visitor, and turned his steps reluctantly toward the dining room where he knew his wife, and probably Jean with her, was likely to be.

As he opened the dining-room door he saw with relief that Mrs. Maclean was alone.

“What signifies the message Jean brought me just now?” she exclaimed. “Why must the marriage be put off, even for one day, Jock? Surely you can postpone going to London till to-morrow afternoon?”

“I’m the bearer of bad news,” he said heavily.

Mrs. Maclean stood up.

“What’s the matter?” she asked in a frightened tone.

As her husband remained silent, she went up to him, and gave his arm a shake:

“Jock? You’re frightening me! Have you found out anything about Harry Garlett? D’you mean you think the marriage will have to be broken off?”

She added, “The child’s fair daft about him!”

81“There’s no question of breaking off the marriage,” he said quickly. “In fact, if I had my way Jean should not be told anything—beyond the bare fact that her wedding must be postponed for a day or two.”

And then, before he could say anything further, the door behind them burst open and Harry Garlett rushed into the room.

His face was drawn and haggard—he looked years older than he had done that morning.

“I hoped to catch that London detective here—but I hear he’s gone. Look here, Maclean. I’ve had time to think over what I ought to do, and I’ve decided to go to London at once and clear the matter up.”

“What matter have you to clear up?” asked Mrs. Maclean.

Garlett walked straight over to where she was standing and looked at her fixedly:

“I am suspected of having murdered my wife, Aunt Jenny,” he said in a hard, matter-of-fact voice, “and from what I can make out that suspicion will never be laid to rest till they have dug up the poor creature and satisfied themselves that she died a natural death.”

The colour drifted from Mrs. Maclean’s healthy face.

“Is what he says true?” she asked, turning to her husband.

“Yes and no,” he answered in a measured tone. “It’s true that Harry has some deadly enemy who is trying to fasten this awful charge on him. But my talk just now with a man named Kentworthy who was sent down from the Home Office——”

“The Home Office?”

Mrs. Maclean was an intelligent woman, and the words struck a note of sharp fear in her breast.

The doctor went on: “I’ve just had the fellow here for over an hour, and I think I’ve convinced him that the—well, the suspicion, if you can go so far as to call it that, is absolutely groundless.”

Harry Garlett broke in: “But did Kentworthy tell you what I forced him to admit to me—that nothing short of an exhumation will really settle the matter, and that unless that takes place the matter may be raised again at any time?”

A tide of dismay welled up in Dr. Maclean’s heart. He 82suddenly realized that what this wild-eyed man, who looked so little like the happy, still young lover of this morning, was saying, was only too true.

Even so he forced himself to exclaim: “You take an exaggerated view, Harry. All I ask you to do is to await the result of my interview with the Home Office people.”

Harry Garlett was staring at the speaker, a look of terrible perplexity as well as acute suffering on his face.

“In any case, I suppose you would admit that our marriage will have to be postponed?” he said slowly.

“Well, yes, I’m afraid it must be—for a day or two.”

And then Mrs. Maclean broke in:

“Before you even decide on that I think you ought to consult Jean. After all, she’s the person most nearly concerned, isn’t she? Though perhaps—” she hesitated painfully, “we need not tell her the reason for the postponement?”

Garlett turned away and stared out into the wintry garden, and there was such a look of anguish on his face that Mrs. Maclean suddenly felt a rush of intense, overwhelming pity for him.

She went across to where he was standing and put her hand gently on his arm. But he made no response.

Dr. Maclean cleared his throat: “Perhaps I’d better go and tell Jean what has happened? I don’t see how we can hope to keep it from her.”

But the unhappy man roused himself: “No!” he said violently, “I’ll tell her myself—I’d rather she heard it from me.

He turned to the doctor. “I know how kind you are——” his voice broke, “but I feel that she ought to hear this vile thing from me——”

“I think that’s true, Jock,” said Mrs. Maclean quietly. “So now I’ll go and find the child.”

She was walking to the door when Garlett asked suddenly: “Where is Jean? Out of doors? I’d rather speak to her there.”

“I’ll see you’re not disturbed.”

Jean Bower was already on her way back to the house when Harry Garlett caught sight of her. She was walking 83quickly, her whole figure instinct with the joyous buoyancy and grace of happy youth.

When she saw her lover she stopped short, pleased and yet surprised, for he had told her that he was not coming back from the factory till late afternoon.

And then, as he hurried up to her, there swept over her a feeling of sharp misgiving.

“Is anything the matter?” she asked affrightedly.

He took hold of her arm and guided her to a brick path which was now, to them both, filled with delicious associations, for it was here that they had always come, during the few short weeks of their secret engagement, to be alone together. Closed in on either side by old yew hedges, it was the only part of the Bonnie Doon garden really sheltered from prying eyes. Often, nay almost always, their first, their only, kisses, on any given day, were taken and given here, between those high, impenetrable walls of living green. To Jean the yew hedge walk had become holy ground.

And so, as they turned the corner, the girl’s heart began to beat quickly. Here it was that Harry always turned with a sudden, passionate movement, and took her in his arms. But to-day her lover hurried her along the uneven brick path until they reached the extreme end of the shadowed walk.

Then, and not till then, he stopped, and faced her with the words: “We can’t be married to-morrow——”

He had meant to add, “I am suspected of having poisoned my wife.” But he found he could not utter the hateful words. They would not come.

And Jean? Gazing up into his haggard face she felt a mingled rush of intense relief and deep, exultant love and tenderness. It moved her to the soul to think that the postponement of their marriage could make him look as he was looking now. But she was quickly, painfully, undeceived.

“A man came to see me at the works this morning to tell me that there seems to be some doubt as to the cause of Emily’s death.”

Her face filled with deep surprise and dismay, but no suspicion of what his words implied crossed her mind. All she did understand was that what had happened had given this man who was so entirely her own, a terrible shock.

84“Why should that make any difference to our being married to-morrow morning?” she asked in a low voice.

“Because neither your aunt nor your uncle would wish you to be married to a man suspected of murder.” He spoke with harsh directness.

“Murder?” Jean Bower’s eyes flashed. She did not shrink, as he had thought she would do; instead she threw herself on his breast and pressed close up to him, putting her arms round his neck.

“If that is true, but I don’t believe it is true, then I want to marry you at once—to-day rather than to-morrow, Harry. Oh, my love, my own dear love, don’t look at me like that!”

His arms hungrily enfolded her, but he shook his head determinedly. “Till the whole thing is cleared up, we’ve got to face this trouble separately.”

“No! No! No!” she exclaimed, looking up eagerly, piteously, into his drawn face. “Not separately, but together, Harry.”

And it was he, not she, who broke down as she pressed up closer to him, for, to her agonized distress, he pushed her away and broke into short, gasping, hard sobs.

“I can’t come back to the house,” he said at last. “Tell your uncle I’ll meet him at the station, my darling.”

She saw he was making a great effort over himself, and very gallantly she “played up.”

“All right, I’ll tell him. But Harry?”

“Yes?” he said listlessly.

“You’ll go now and get something to eat. Promise?” and for the first time her lips quivered.

“I promise.”

Again he took her in his arms. Their lips met and clung together. At last, “Oh, Jean,” he whispered brokenly, “do you think we shall ever be happy again?”

“Of course we shall,” she said confidently.

And then she walked with him through the wintry, bare garden to the field where there was a gate which gave into the road leading to Grendon. There they did not kiss again. They only shook hands quietly.

85
CHAPTER VIII
The scene shifts to London—London, so indifferent, so cruel, so drab a city to those whom she is stranger, not mother.

Harry Garlett and Dr. Maclean had gone to a city hotel where they felt sure that they would run little risk of meeting any one from their part of the world.

And it was there, within sound of what he vaguely felt to be the comforting roar of London’s busiest traffic, that Garlett paced up and down a big private sitting room in the cold, foggy atmosphere of a December afternoon, while he waited for the doctor’s return from the Criminal Investigation Department of the Home Office.

At last he stopped and looked at his watch. But for the cruel man or woman who had written the anonymous letters of which Dr. Maclean had told him, he and Jean would by now have been man and wife. He reminded himself drearily that he had forgotten to cancel his order for the small suite of rooms overlooking the Thames where they were to have spent their Christmas honeymoon. Well, so much the better! It gave him a little satisfaction to know that the rooms which were to have been the scene of his ecstatic happiness were empty of life, of joy, of laughter, for at least a little while.

The door of the darkened room burst open, and Dr. Maclean’s hearty voice exclaimed exultantly: “Our trouble’s over! The Home Office is going to take no further action in the matter——”

Then he shut the door, turning on, as he did so, the electric light.

“I had a great stroke of luck! One of the two men sent to examine me was an old fellow-student of mine, a fellow called Wilson, an Aberdeen chap. It made everything easy, of course.”

86Putting his hat down on a table, he came close up to the other man.

“My God, Harry, don’t look like that! The trouble’s over, man—don’t you understand?”

“You’re a good friend, Maclean. I’ll never forget how you’ve stood by me in this thing——”

“Nonsense!” he said strongly. “I was as much in it as you were—your poor wife was my patient, after all. I signed her death certificate.”

“I want to ask you a question—and I trust to you to answer it truly,” said Harry Garlett in a low, tense tone.

“Ask away, man!”

The doctor said the words jokingly, but he felt hurt and disappointed—tired, too. He had put every ounce of power he possessed—and there was a good deal of power in Jock Maclean—into the difficult interview he had just carried through so successfully.

“Did you obtain an assurance that the inquiry into the cause of Emily’s death would never be reopened?”

Harry Garlett’s question made Dr. Maclean feel acutely uncomfortable. It seemed to bring back, echoing in his ears, the last words that old friend of his, Donald Wilson, had uttered: “The matter is now closed, Maclean—unless, of course, anything in the form of real evidence be tendered us.”

So it was that for a fraction of a minute he remained silent.

“I take it they gave you no such assurance?”

“How could they do such a thing?” exclaimed the other. “Come, Harry, be reasonable!”

Garlett started once more his restless pacing up and down the now brightly lit room; then, all at once, he turned on the older man.

“I consider myself entitled to such an assurance, and I won’t be satisfied with less. The greatest indignity that can be put on an innocent man has been put on me. You weren’t present during my interview with that police inspector, Kentworthy! At first the man scarcely took the trouble to conceal his belief that I was a murderer.”

As the other uttered an impatient exclamation, he added: “Can’t you see what it would mean to me, to Jean, to feel 87that awful possibility always hanging over us? I’ve made up my mind to go to the Home Office myself to-morrow morning. If they refuse to give me an assurance that the matter is closed once and for all, I shall insist on my right to an exhumation order.”

“Then you will do a stupid, as well as a very cruel and selfish thing,” said the doctor sharply.

“Cruel? Selfish? I don’t follow you——” And as the other remained silent he went on, in a low voice, “Again I ask you to try and realize what it would mean—not only to myself but to Jean—if, after we had been married say six months, or a year, we suddenly learnt that an exhumation order had been issued.”

Dr. Maclean began to feel thoroughly angry.

“Pull yourself together, man,” he said sharply, “and don’t go havering on as to what might happen—I am thinking of what will certainly happen if you follow the course you propose.”

Harry Garlett stared at Dr. Maclean. “What d’you mean?”

“I mean that you’ve really only been considering yourself in this matter. You’re not really thinking of that poor little girlie who loves you——”

“I am thinking of her—only of her!”

“You’re doing nothing of the sort. If you had only yourself to think of you might insist on settling this horrible matter at once for all in the drastic way you propose. But to do so now would be a cruel wrong to Jean.”

He waited a moment, then, speaking very solemnly, he went on:

“Most people are convinced of the truth of that evil old proverb, ‘There’s no smoke without fire.’ The fact that your wife’s body had been exhumed, and certain portions of that poor body submitted to certain tests by a government expert, would never be forgotten.”

“I suppose that’s true,” said Garlett slowly, and Dr. Maclean pursued his advantage.

He put his hand on the younger man’s shoulder, “For God’s sake, let the matter rest. As things are now I regard it as practically certain that this painful business will never be known beyond just our four selves.”

88“Our four selves?” repeated Harry Garlett uncertainly.

“Of course, man! Myself, my wife, Jean and you.”

There was a long pause, and Dr. Maclean, with intense relief, believed that he had gained his point. But suddenly Harry Garlett exclaimed:

“It’s no use, Maclean! I can’t see it as you do. I shall go to the Home Office to-morrow morning.”

“I suppose you agree that Jean has a right to be consulted before you take a step that may cloud all her future life?”

“I know Jean will agree with me,” said Harry Garlett obstinately.

“Give her a chance of hearing the other side, man. Damn it all! You do owe me something——”

He turned toward the door. “I’ll telephone my wife to bring the girl up to-night.” Without waiting for the other’s assent he left the room.

Then, for he was an upright man, and not given to deceiving himself, Dr. Maclean stayed his steps for a moment on the big, empty hotel landing.

He was asking himself whether, after all, Harry Garlett might not be taking the right course in settling this painful, degrading question once for all. He had felt, in spite of the courtesy, nay, the kindness, with which he had been treated at the Home Office, that an uncomfortable suspicion did still linger in the minds of the two men with whom he had had his difficult interview. Deep in his heart he was well aware that it was the fortunate accident of his old acquaintance with that now important government official, Donald Wilson, coupled, of course, with his own absolute conviction that Mrs. Garlett had died a natural death, which had achieved what at the moment had seemed such a triumph.

It was five hours later. The hotel sitting room was in darkness, save that no uncurtained room in London is ever really dark, and there was also a little fire in the black grate. But no one coming in casually would have seen the two who sat on the sofa hand in hand.

As soon as Jean and her aunt had arrived, there had begun the painful, difficult consultation—if, indeed, consultation it could be called, for Jean and the man she loved had listened 89in silence while the doctor and Mrs. Maclean tried to dissuade Harry Garlett from taking the course he meant to pursue.

At last, after having used every conceivable argument, husband and wife got up together.

“Let us go down and have a little supper,” said the doctor. “After that you two shall come up here alone and talk it over. Don’t be in too great a hurry to make up your mind, Harry. Weigh everything, and, above all, remember that ‘What’s done can’t be undone.’”

And now at last they were alone together. For a while neither of them spoke, and then Harry Garlett said quietly, “Your uncle has made me see one thing, my dearest. That I ought to leave the decision with you.”

“If the decision rests with me, then I say—do what you feel right.”

Moving up closer to him, she whispered: “The only thing that matters to me—surely you know it—is our love. Nothing can take that away. After all, we’re not bound to go on living in Terriford.”

“That’s true!” he exclaimed. “All the same, remember that if you feel the slightest doubt I’ll put aside my wish.”

“I feel not the slightest doubt. On the contrary, I’m quite sure,” she answered, without a tremor in her voice, “that whatever you feel should be done will be well done.”

Big Ben was booming out the hour of half-past ten as Harry Garlett was ushered into one of the bare waiting rooms of the Criminal Investigation Department. And it seemed to him a long time before the door opened again to admit the man he had asked to see.

Dr. Wilson was a good-humoured, cheerful-looking Scot, very much on the alert, and, if the truth be told, though it was a truth mercifully concealed from Garlett, a man sufficiently interested in human nature to feel a considerable thrill at seeing face to face a human being he was strongly inclined to believe a successful murderer.

“I’m told you’ve specially asked to see me, Mr. Garlett. So I take it you’ve not seen our mutual friend, Dr. Maclean? He spent a couple of hours here yesterday, and I think I may go as far as to assure you that unless some new and unexpected 90development should take place, the matter concerning which Mr. Kentworthy came down to Terriford will go no further.”

“Does that mean,” asked Harry Garlett quietly, “that I may rest assured that no order for the exhumation of my late wife will ever be issued?”

The Scotsman looked at him keenly. “We could not give such an assurance to any living man, Mr. Garlett. Not even,” he smiled grimly, “to the Lord Chancellor or the Archbishop of Canterbury.”

Then the speaker’s whole manner changed—it became grave, official. “Perhaps,” he went on, “I had better send for my colleague, and, may I add, my superior, Mr. Braithwaite? He will tell you exactly how the matter stands.”

“That,” said Garlett firmly, “is what I have come here to discover—I mean exactly how the matter stands.”

Dr. Wilson left the room, and when at last, after what seemed a long delay to the waiting man, he did come back, he was accompanied by a younger official. Garlett, perhaps by now morbidly sensitive, noticed that the new man only bowed; he did not shake hands with him, as Dr. Wilson had done.

“I understand that you wish to know exactly how the matter stands with regard to the action we took on the receipt of certain anonymous letters concerning the death of Mrs. Emily Garlett?”

“What I wish to know,” said Garlett coldly, “is not how the matter stands, but how I stand.”

As neither of the men opposite him answered his question, he went on deliberately: “Though I believe I was successful in convincing of my innocence the police inspector you sent down to make inquiries, he made it clear to me that nothing short of an exhumation would set the matter absolutely at rest.”

“In saying such a thing,” said Mr. Braithwaite sharply, “Kentworthy went very much beyond his instructions. But of course I admit that in a sense, speaking to you as man to man, he spoke the truth.”

Harry Garlett looked fixedly at the speaker, as if suddenly dowered with something like second-sight. He could almost see the interrogation mark in Mr. Braithwaite’s mind: “Is 91this man standing here before me an innocent man, or that vilest form of murderer—the secret poisoner?”

Speaking in a hard, composed tone of voice, he said firmly:

“I will be open with you, gentlemen. You probably know that I am going to be married. Putting myself out of the question, I feel that for the sake of my future wife I am compelled to ask the Home Secretary to issue an exhumation order. Surely I have the right, as an Englishman accused—however you may gloss over the fact—of the hideous crime of murder, to insist on the only thing that can absolutely clear me?”

At that moment Harry Garlett triumphed. The two civil servants looked at one another, each of them convinced that the man who had just spoken those strong, determined words was innocent.

“Have you the slightest conception of what will happen if the Home Secretary accedes to your request, Mr. Garlett?” The words were uttered gravely and kindly.

“Do you realize that it will be impossible for the fact of the exhumation of your wife’s body to be concealed from the press—not only the local press, mind you, but the press of the whole country?”

“Yes, I do realize that. In fact, everything to be said against an exhumation has been put to me, and very strongly, by Dr. Maclean.”

“Then why not let the matter rest for the present?” interposed Dr. Wilson. “While it is obviously impossible for us to give you any promise, unofficially we can assure you that the matter is closed, and that only in the case of real evidence of foul play would it be reopened.”

Mr. Braithwaite chimed in: “Forgive me for alluding to your private affairs, but may I say that what you are now asking us to do may be a very grave matter for the lady who is going to be your wife, Mr. Garlett?”

“We talked it over last evening, and I left the final decision to her. So you see that it is her wish as well as mine that the matter should be laid to rest for ever in the only way it can be laid to rest.”

And then, speaking with deep feeling, he exclaimed:

“Put yourselves in my place! Think what you would feel”—he looked from one to the other of the men who 92were confronting him—“if you were situated as I am situated. Would you not do everything in your power to put an end, once for all, to so horrible, so hideous a suspicion?”

“I wonder if I should,” said Mr. Braithwaite musingly. “Honestly, I don’t feel at all sure!”

He waited a moment.

“You formally ask that an exhumation order be issued, Mr. Garlett?”

“Yes, I do most earnestly ask that it may be issued. Nay, more, I regard it as my right.”

Both men shook hands with him, yet after the last echoes of their visitor’s footsteps had died away, they simultaneously exclaimed the one to the other: “I don’t know what to think—do you?”

“It isn’t often that you and I are so absolutely of one mind, Wilson, eh?” Mr. Braithwaite spoke jokingly, but there was an undercurrent of deep questioning in his voice. “If Garlett is guilty, then he’s the most cunning devil of the many cunning devils you and I have come across! But of one thing we may be quite sure—nothing of a surprising nature will be found in the poor woman’s body. If our friend did kill her, he has completely covered up his tracks!”

“I am inclined to believe,” said the other hesitatingly, “that Garlett is an absolutely innocent man.”

“In that case, God help the poor devil! He doesn’t know what he’s letting himself in for,” observed Braithwaite. “He’ll be a marked man all his life. Think of what a country town can be like for malice and all uncharitableness.”

“I wonder,” said the Scotsman, “if it’s the girl who’s driven him to this extreme course? What if she’s made her marriage conditional on all this mess being cleared up? She may have done that—if she’s a fool. It’s plain he’s entirely devoted to her.”

“Kentworthy says they were talked about long before his first wife’s death.”

“I didn’t forget that fact just now,” said Dr. Wilson smiling. “When he first spoke of the girl I said to myself: ‘She’s the cause of all the mischief. Keep clear of the sex, Donald, my boy!’”

93
CHAPTER IX
Ten long days, including the quietest Christmas ever spent in Bonnie Doon, and then on the second day of the New Year—“A letter for you, Miss Jean, from the Thatched House.” Elsie’s dour face softened as the girl eagerly tore open the envelope.

My dearest Love,
I find I can’t come to-night as I had hoped to do, but I will be with you early to-morrow morning.

Always your
Harry.
Jean remembered that a telegram had come for her uncle a few moments ago. Now telegrams were always being delivered at Bonnie Doon, but some secret instinct now seemed to tell her that this time the telegram had had something to do with her lover and his affairs.

She walked into the doctor’s study, and when he saw who it was, he opened the top drawer of the writing table at which he was sitting, and slipped something into it.

“Well?” he said, looking up, “Well, my dear, what d’you want?”

She came close up to the table, and he was dismayed to see how sad and suffering was the expression on her young face.

“Uncle Jock,” she said in a low voice, “Harry has just sent me word that he can’t come this evening. I suppose——” and then she stopped short; somehow she could not bring herself to say the horrible words. But at last she whispered: “I suppose they are going to dig up poor Mrs. Garlett’s coffin to-night?”

Dr. Maclean rose from his chair; he put his arm round the girl’s shoulder. “Yes,” he said quietly, “you have guessed 94aright, Jean. The exhumation is to take place to-night, and Harry and I will both, of course, be present.”

He could feel her trembling, and he saw her right hand open and shut.

“You must remind yourself,” he went on, “that what is going to be done to-night marks the beginning of the end—as far as Harry’s painful ordeal is concerned. You and I know—indeed I am convinced that even those who have ordered the exhumation feel as sure of it as we do—that the result will be nil; that is to say, from our point of view, absolutely satisfactory.”

“I know that,” she murmured in a strangled voice. “But I don’t feel as if that knowledge made the shame of it any easier to bear—now.”

He felt startled. It was the first time that Jean had admitted that there was any shame to be faced.

“Nonsense!” he exclaimed vigorously. “Think what you would be feeling—what I should be feeling—if we had the slightest doubt about the matter?”

She had moved away, and was looking at him with wide-open eyes.

“I—I don’t understand,” she stammered.

“Forget yourself and Harry for a moment.” He felt that a touch of sternness, even of roughness, would do the girl good just now. “Think of what the innocent friends, ay, and lovers, of a real murderer must feel when the net is slowly but inexorably closing round him. Supposing you half suspected, or a quarter suspected, or even a hundredth part suspected—the man you love?”

The girl smiled; but it was a wan, pitiful smile.

“I can’t imagine such a thing. And you know I can’t, Uncle Jock.”

“Are you going to answer Harry’s note?” he asked abruptly.

“Do you think I ought?”

“I do! I think you ought to write him a cheerful brave letter, reminding him that this is the beginning of the end, and that within a very short time you and he will have come out from the darkness into the sunshine.”

She went straight round the writing table, and leaning down, drew a sheet of notepaper toward her. She wrote:

95My darling Harry,
I know what is going to happen to-night. I want you to remember that it is the beginning of the end; that very soon, in a few days at most, we shall have come out from the darkness into the sunshine.

Your own loving
Jean.
And then, after she had addressed the envelope, she put her hands over her face, and burst into a passion of anguished sobs.

Sheltered by the heavy pall of a dark winter night, Jean Bower, six hours later, crept out of the garden door of Bonnie Doon into the lonely country road which led to Terriford churchyard. It was a bitterly cold, as well as a dark, night, but it was not the cold and darkness which made her tremble so violently that she found it difficult to shut the front door behind her.

For almost the first time in her life she was doing a thing which she believed to be wrong. She knew that not only her uncle and aunt, but also her lover, would be profoundly distressed and shocked by what she had long ago secretly determined she would do—that is, share, in as far as was possible without his being aware of it, Harry Garlett’s horrible ordeal.

After an evening during which none of the three had spoken of what was filling all their minds and hearts, she had waited in her bedroom, trying to read, until close to midnight. Then there had come the sound of the front door shutting softly behind Dr. Maclean, and, allowing him a good quarter of an hour’s start, she had crept down the stairs, and followed him.

Jean’s eyes soon became accustomed to the darkness, and when she knew herself to be close to the wrought-iron gate which led into the grounds of the Thatched House, she waited a moment, scarcely daring to breathe, for she felt that it would be terrible for her, and horribly painful to them both, were she to meet Harry Garlett on the way to his sinister tryst.

As she walked up the broad, now deserted, village street, at the top of which were the church and churchyard with only fields and country lanes beyond, there was a red glow 96over the sky, and she could see the roof and clock-tower of the church outlined against it. She told herself, vaguely, that a house must be on fire somewhere far away, but the thought scarcely stirred her, so intent was she on the dreadful thing that was about to be done.

When she came close up to the lych-gate she stayed her steps and listened intently. But there was neither stir nor sound, and she reminded herself that Mrs. Garlett’s grave lay the other side of the church and so even in daylight was completely hidden from where she was now standing.

She had moved a step forward, her foot kicking aside a stone as she did so, when all at once a bull’s-eye lantern was turned full on her. Giving a stifled cry of surprise and fear, she waited, shrinkingly, for a stern inquiry as to her name and business to follow. But to her mingled relief and amazement it was a kindly, if a gruff, voice which came out of the darkness.

“Well, missie? Come to see the fun, I suppose?”

“The fun?” Could the still invisible man have said “the fun”?

Then the lantern was lifted a little, and by its gleaming light she saw a burly figure dressed in a plain chauffeur’s uniform. Slowly he turned his lantern round, and then she became aware that drawn up under an evergreen oak overhanging the banked-up churchyard wall was a huge police motor car.

Again the man spoke, but this time it was in a whisper: “If ye’ll promise not to cry out, or faint, or do summat silly o’ that sort, I’ll get you a good sight of it all——”

“Thank you very much,” she faltered, feeling overwhelmed with shame and confusion.

He went on: “Though ’tis a gruesome sight, sure-lye, for a young gal to want to see? But there! I’ve been young myself, and I can mind when I wanted to see every earthly thing there was to see, ’owever fearsome——”

“I should like to see it,” she whispered back in a trembling voice, “but only if I can do so without being seen by any one who’s there.”

“Trust to me, missie! I’ll make that all right,” he said reassuringly. “They’ll be much too busy over their job to trouble about you or me. You come right through ’ere.”

97He half pushed, half led her through the lych-gate, and turning his lantern toward the ground, slowly preceded her, as they threaded their way between the gray and white gravestones.

“I’ve brought a party of six,” he muttered huskily, “and apart from the grave-diggers, and the undertaker’s little lot, there’s the corpse’s doctor, so I understand, as well as the fine gentleman who did ’is poor lady in.”

Jean Bower stayed her steps.

“You mustn’t say that—for Mr. Garlett is innocent of having done any wrong.”

She felt convulsed with pain and anger, though her words were whispered quietly enough.

The man turned round. “Every man and every woman, too,” he muttered huskily, “is hinnocent, as we well knows, until found guilty. But it stands to reason, don’t it, that this kind of thing ain’t done for nothing? ’E ’as got a nerve to be ’ere to-night at all—’e needn’t ’a been.”

A moment later, turning round again, he asked with sudden suspicion, “You’ve nothing to do with ’im—eh? You’re not an hinterested party, eh?”

And then Jean Bower, who had never told a lie, lied. “No, I’m just a visitor to Terriford,” she murmured.

Reassured, he went on, keeping near the low wall, as far from the church as was possible.

Suddenly a turn in the narrow way between the graves left the church to their right, and Jean saw before her what she had come to see, and instinctively she clutched hold of her companion’s strong arm and clung to it, feeling sick and faint.

Lighted by two big flares, whence had come the curious glow which Jean had thought caused by a distant fire, a group of men were moving about close to, and just below, the walls of the old stone church; and stretching in dancing, shadowy lines on the gravestones round, the men’s shadows came and went in queer, grotesque shapes.

Moving very slowly, her companion advanced nearer and nearer to the strange, uncannily silent scene, at which Jean, gathering a desperate courage from within herself, stared with affrighted eyes. Then all at once she saw the man whose image filled her heart.

98Harry Garlett was standing almost exactly facing her, at the head of Emily Garlett’s open grave. He seemed quite incurious of what was being done, for he was staring straight before him, his bare head flung back.

“The Home Office gent ’as ’is back turned to us,” whispered Jean’s companion. “’E’s ’ere to see that there’s no tampering with the poor lady’s remains.”

The girl pressed forward, shrouded in a darkness which was made the more intense by the bright light shed by the flares beyond, and, gradually, she began to realize exactly what was taking place in the lighted-up space before her.

Four men, two on each side of what looked like a deep, narrow trench, were exerting all their strength to lift the coffin up out of what Jean knew to be the freshly opened grave of Harry Garlett’s wife. And, after what seemed to the agonized watcher a long, long time, they succeeded in their task. Then there came the sound of heavy, muffled footsteps; out of the darkness stepped two other men, and the six together placed the coffin on to a hand bier which Jean had not noticed before.

“They’ll take her to that cottage yonder: I helped to get it ready for ’em,” muttered her companion hoarsely.

“What cottage?” she asked, surprised.

“Not better than a dog kennel!—but good enough for the gentleman from London—him what they call a hanalist—’e who’s the cause of many a ’anging,” whispered the man.

And then Jean remembered that on the other side of the churchyard wall, standing in a field, was a kind of shanty which she knew had been condemned, largely owing to her uncle’s efforts, as unfit for human habitation some months ago.

She forced herself to ask what was to her an all-important question.

“Is it there that they’ll find out what Mrs. Garlett died from?”

“Lord, no!” he exclaimed, astonished at such ignorance, “that’s a long business—that’s done in London.”

“Then what will they do there?” she asked, puzzled and disappointed, and with no prevision of his answer.

“Well, missie, what’ll be done in that cottage over there won’t be a pleasant job. I’m glad I’m not in it.”

99“What are they going to do?” she breathed.

“They’ll take parts of the lady’s inside and put them into jars. Then the poor soul will rest once more in her coffin. Meanwhile, that which ’as been removed (if you take my meaning) will be taken away to London, and it’s according to the report of the gentleman I pointed out to you just now whether the ’usband will get off scot-free or whether he’ll swing.”

He uttered the dreadful words in a matter-of-fact tone, and Jean turned suddenly sick and faint.

“Will you help me back to the gate?” she muttered. “I don’t want to stay here any longer.”

“Not just a few minutes more?” he asked, disappointed. “If you goes now, you’ll miss the most hinteresting part of the whole affair. They’re just going to unscrew the coffin, and take her out, and it isn’t as if we was near enough to see anything that ’ud frighten you——”

But, already, Jean had turned and was blindly making her way back, among the gravestones, toward the lych-gate.

She was bitterly, bitterly sorry now that she had come. She felt that as long as she lived the memory of to-night would remain most presently and horribly vivid to her, and she knew that it was a memory of shame and horror she must ever bear alone.

“Don’t ’e look like a murderer?”

“Course he does—he is one!”

Harry Garlett turned sharply round. For a moment his weary face, his shrunken eyes, glanced quickly this way and that, seeking to find out who had uttered those cruel words.

It was the day following the night of the exhumation, and market day in Grendon. On the high paved sidewalk there paced up and down, jostling one another, a crowd of men, though here and there a woman, a farmer’s wife or daughter, mingled in the throng.

And then all at once Garlett realized that as he stepped quickly along, people were pointing him out to one another, and that many of them were staring at him, some furtively, but the majority with an eager, pitiless stare of almost savage curiosity.

A boy selling the local daily, a small sheet called The Grendon 100News, came bounding along, and he could hardly hand the paper out quickly enough to those who had not already got it in their hand.

Harry Garlett called out: “Here, boy, I want that paper!” and at the sound of his harsh voice the men round him all fell silent, and stared at him with a more pitiless curiosity than before.

He took the paper, paid the boy, and held it out. Right across the little local sheet, in as big type as had been set out the declaration of war in August, 1914, ran the words “Exhumation of Mrs. Emily Garlett.”

He walked on, hardly knowing what he was doing, and yet horribly aware that his fellow townsmen and country neighbours were now forming a lane, leaving the way clear for him alone on the pavement.

Not a face smiled in greeting, not a hand was stretched out to him of the many hands there which had so often grasped his in kindly friendship, or in fervent admiration of his cricketing prowess.

At last he reached what he believed would be to him a place of refuge. But as he turned into the great square courtyard of the Etna China factory, he saw faces glued to every window-pane.

His coming had been heralded, and all these people with whom he had been on such happy, friendly terms till yesterday, were now staring at him as if he were some terrible wild beast.

But having gazed, as they hoped furtively, their fill, they melted quickly away from the windows. He was, after all, their employer, the master of their destinies, until——?

He hurried into the hall, and turned into the clerks’ room. “Any one called yet?”

“No, sir, no one.”

The man who spoke to him looked much as usual, the other clerk had a foolish, nervous grin on his face.

He walked on into his own room, took off his hat and coat, sat down, and forced himself to open the letters which lay as usual piled on his desk.

Then he telephoned through to the room where his young lady shorthand writer must be awaiting his summons. But there came no answer to his call.

101He waited five minutes, then tried to get through to her again—without result. Then he got up and went to the clerks’ room. “Where is Miss Faring?” he asked.

His head clerk hesitated a moment. “Miss Faring’s mother brought a note about half an hour ago, sir. I’m sorry I forgot it.”

He handed his employer a black-bordered envelope, and Harry Garlett, walking out of the room, opened the note in the hall.

Dear Mr. Garlett,
I am sure you will agree with me that under the circumstances it is far better that my daughter should suspend her work with you for the present. I hope you will not think it impertinent of me to say that you and Miss Bower have both been so very kind to Nancy that I trust with all my heart that the terrible things that are being said about you both are not true. Nay, I will go further, dear Mr. Garlett, and say that I am sure they are not true.

Yours very truly,
Mary Faring.
Terrible things said about Jean and himself? This was a far greater, a more agonizing, blow, than anything he had yet experienced.

He walked into his room and, careless of possible interruption, sat down and buried his head in his hands.

Jean—the subject of low, coarse gossip? Jean—the subject of odious innuendo?

He started up and began walking up and down the room. The fearful ordeal of last night, the horror attendant on his recent hideous progress through the High Street—everything was forgotten in the news conveyed in Mrs. Faring’s letter.

Garlett was a proud and sensitive man. He had put aside, as he would have done a noxious sight or smell, those half questions put to him by James Kentworthy, the detective, concerning his relationship with Jean Bower. But now the memory of those questions, those veiled insinuations, came back, and with that memory the agonized realization that Jean Bower had been even then suspected as providing the motive for an otherwise motiveless crime.

But, fortunately for most of us at some time of our lives, work has to be done—whatever betide. So at last the unhappy man sat down and began the tedious task of answering 102with his own hand the letters which otherwise he would have dictated. As he did so, he found himself, for the first time in his life, struggling with two distinct currents of thought—the one superficial, concerning the letters he was writing; the other still passionately concerned with the news contained in Mrs. Faring’s letter. In vain he now tried to assure himself that his and Jean’s ordeal was bound to be a short one, and that once the Government analyst’s report was published he would be able to take up life again exactly as it had been.

Well he knew, now, that life could never be the same again. If he remained at Terriford he realized that even if he lived to be a very old man, there would always be somebody ready to point him out as the man who had been suspected of having murdered his first wife for love of the woman who had become his second.

Though he had arrived very late at the factory, he had never spent a morning there which seemed so long and dreary. None of his usual business associates came in to see him, no one even rang him up on the telephone. It was as though a desert had been created round about him, and bitterly he felt the humiliation, the degradation, of it all.

At one o’clock he got up, and, putting on his hat and coat, went into the clerks’ room: “I shall not be here this afternoon,” and then painfully he hesitated. Yesterday he would have added, “Should you want me—get through to Bonnie Doon,” but that stinging sentence in Mrs. Faring’s letter stopped his saying that.

“Should you want me,” he said quietly, “I shall be at the Thatched House after three o’clock.”

He had tried to speak, to look, as usual, but he knew that he had failed.

In the hall he waited irresolutely. No, he would not go out, as usual, through the courtyard, as perhaps another kind of man would have done. Grimly he told himself that, in a sense, he accepted defeat. He felt he could not face again the stares of his workpeople and of his fellow townsmen.

Taking a rusty key off its hook, he walked through the now empty shuttered rooms which had once been the home of his wife’s parents. He hurried through the silent, cobwebbed 103kitchen into the narrow, sunless garden. A door at the bottom of the garden led into an alley which was an unfrequented and generally more or less deserted way of getting out of the town.

He hurried through the door, and once out there he felt as if he breathed a lighter air. And yet, as he hastened along, it seemed to his excited fancy that he could hear the busy murmur of voices, cruel, spiteful, eager voices—all talking of him, of his poor dead wife, and, hideous thought, Jean.

At last, after passing through some mean and sordid streets, he reached the open country, and the clean, keen air worked something like a miracle in his tortured brain. By the time he opened the front door of Bonnie Doon he was almost himself again, filled with joy at the thought of seeing Jean, the only human being to whom he could pour out his heart, and who could bring him comfort.

Elsie, the cook, came quickly out of her kitchen.

“Eh, Mr. Garlett,” she exclaimed, “I’ve been watching for ye! D’you mind going into the doctor’s study? Miss Jean’s not down yet.”

“She’s not ill?”

“No, no—only tired. Don’t ye fash yourself,” said the good woman.

And then the door of the doctor’s study opened.

“Come in here, Garlett, just for a minute, will you?”

Was it his fancy, or was Dr. Maclean’s voice cold—cold to sternness?

“Jean was in the churchyard last night,” began the doctor without any preamble. “She didn’t mean us to know—but my wife got it out of her—and it’s smashed her up. I’ve given her a soothing draught, and I want her to stay in bed quietly all to-day. I meant to ring you up, but we didn’t expect you till this afternoon.”

He spoke in a low, preoccupied tone. “I’m sure you’ll understand, my dear fellow,” his voice softened as he used the affectionate appellation, “that I think it’s best you shouldn’t see her to-day. You’ll see her to-morrow, no doubt.”

Harry Garlett remained silent. He was sick with horror at the thought that Jean had been in the churchyard.

“Why did you let her come last night?” he asked roughly.

104“I let her come?” repeated Dr. Maclean sharply. “It’s the last thing I should have thought her capable of doing. It’s the first time her aunt and I have found her out in doing anything deceitful or—well, I can only call it indelicate! But there, she felt half distraught. It’s fortunate that it’s only a fortnight now—it may be three weeks at the longest—before everything will be cleared up.”

“And how are we to get through the fortnight or three weeks?” asked Garlett hoarsely.

His mind was full of what had happened that morning, but he told himself with relief that of what was apparently being said in Grendon Dr. Maclean knew nothing.

“Come, come, man—show a little courage! You’ve a long life of happiness and prosperity before you. How few can say that!”

“I know that I’m not reasonable,” muttered Garlett.

“But there’s one thing, Harry”—the older man bent forward and laid his hand on the younger man’s shoulder. “There’s one thing, my boy, I’m minded to say to you, and I expect you to take it in a sensible, upright way.”

“I’ll try to, sir.”

“Both Mrs. Maclean and myself feel very strongly that during this time of waiting you should see very little of Jean. We haven’t the heart to say you’re not to meet at all, though we think that would be the best plan. But we do think you should do nothing to give cause for any talk or gossip—even in the village.”

As Garlett made no answer, the doctor went on reluctantly, “I can hardly bear to bring myself to soil my lips with what, however, I feel must be said. You are probably not aware that there has been talk about you and Jean?”

“I was not aware of it till this morning,” said Garlett in a low, shaky voice, “though of course Kentworthy asked me some strange questions.”

“Ay, so he did me! Even here there’s been, it seems, a lot of poisonous gossip. I’ve traced one story direct to Miss Prince—a story of how you and that poor girl upstairs walked home on the day before your wife died.”

“Did we?” said Harry Garlett in a dull voice. “I’d forgotten that. I daresay we did. For the matter of that I’ve walked home from Grendon to Terriford with most of our 105neighbours in the last thirteen years, including Miss Prince herself.”

“I know that,” said the doctor quickly. “But to come back to the matter in hand. I don’t want to be unreasonable, but I do hope that you will both behave—well, how can I put it?—with sense and discretion. After all, it isn’t very long to wait; you’ll be married within less than a month from now, and then you’ll be together for always. Till you’re married, I’m quite sure you’d best see as little as possible of one another.”

“I quite see what you mean, and I daresay you’re right.” He was beginning to feel himself a pariah.

“I’ll be going back to the Thatched House for lunch,” he went on forlornly, remembering vividly how only yesterday he had been pressed to come to-day to this house from which he now felt he was being expelled.

“I think that will be best,” said Dr. Maclean uncomfortably. “I’ll telephone through and say you’re coming along.”

106
CHAPTER X
Afortnight to the day after the exhumation of Mrs. Garlett, Dr. Maclean, after reading his necessary letters, walked through the hall into the kitchen.

“Elsie,” he said abruptly, “I want your good help. First, go and tell your mistress that I require to see her about something urgent and private. Then get hold of Miss Jean and make her stay with you in here till I have done with your mistress.”

The woman, an old and trusted friend by now, just nodded her head. “Ay,” she said, “I’ll do all that.”

A few moments later Mrs. Maclean hurried into her husband’s study. “What is it?” she asked breathlessly. “You shouldn’t frighten me like that, Jock. ‘Secret and urgent’ indeed!”

“Lock the door,” he said briefly.

She turned the key in the lock, and came over close to where he was sitting. “What is it, Jock?”

He did not answer for a moment, and then he said very quietly: “Harry Garlett did poison his wife. He is to be arrested to-day, and we must manage to get Jean away, if it’s in any way possible, before that happens.”

She stared across into her husband’s set face, but, though utterly amazed and horror-struck, she uttered no exclamation of surprise. She simply waited to hear more.

“Well,” he said irritably, “well, Jenny, did you expect this?”

“I expect it?” she exclaimed. “I expected it as little as you did. But what makes you so certain, Jock? Is there no loophole of escape?”

And then she muttered as to herself, “It’s the child I’m thinking of. What will happen to Jean—if this is true?”

“She’ll have to go through with it,” he said grimly. And then he handed her a letter. It was marked “Private,” and ran as follows:

107Dear Maclean,
I feel I owe it to our old friendship to inform you that Garlett is to be arrested to-morrow on the charge of having murdered his wife. I may add, for your own information, that our man has found five grains of arsenic, the largest amount ever given in his experience. It had actually penetrated the graveclothes inside the coffin.

I hope you won’t think it impertinent on my part to suggest that you would be wise to send your poor young niece as far away as may be. How about Iona? Should she be required to give evidence, which I hope will not be the case, she could always come back.

Yours in frantic haste,
Donald Wilson.
There was a postscript:

Of course I have no business to write you this letter. I’m doing it for old times’ sake. You may care to know that Kentworthy, though shaken, still believes that Garlett may be innocent. K. has left the Government service. It might be as well for Garlett to employ him in getting up his case. His address is 100 Chancery Lane.

Mrs. Maclean read the letter twice through. Then she handed it back to her husband.

“You’ll never get Jean to go away,” she said quietly. “She wouldn’t believe Harry Garlett guilty if an angel from heaven came and told her he was.”

“But he is guilty!” exclaimed Dr. Maclean, striking the table with his hand.

“I don’t think you have any call to say that yet,” observed his wife.

“I shan’t say it out of this room till I have to get up and say it on oath in the witness-box,” he said sombrely.

“Oh, Jock! Will you have to do that?”

“Of course I shall,” he answered bitterly—“and be known for the rest of my life as the medical man who was bamboozled into giving a wrong death certificate.”

Dismay kept her silent. Till this moment she had only thought of Harry Garlett, and of how all this would affect Jean. She now realized what it would mean to her husband.

She suddenly went very pale, and Dr. Maclean felt queerly touched. He got up and laid his hand gently on her shoulder.

“Come, come, woman,” he said a little huskily. “Things are never as bad as they look! Many a better man than I has made that kind of mistake. As for Jean, she’s young 108yet. She’ll get over it, never fear.” As his wife remained silent, he added: “It isn’t as if we’d been improvident—if need be we can leave Terriford.”

“No,” said Mrs. Maclean in a low tone, “we must stay and face it out. But as for Jean, we’ll have to make some plan. She won’t go away now—not a hope of it. But if yon man’s hanged we’ll get her right away; I mean to some place where no one will have heard about this awful thing—to my sister in New Zealand, or to the MacPhersons in San Francisco.”

He looked at her, amazed. This was foresight with a vengeance. Why, she had already tried, judged, condemned, and, yes, hanged, Harry Garlett!

“Till this morning,” he said with a groan, “I would have staked my life on yon man’s innocence.”

And then Mrs. Maclean said something which startled her husband.

“It’s all so strange,” she said musingly, “because, as you well know, Jock, he hardly knew our Jean then.”

“It had nothing to do with Jean!” he said violently. “For God’s sake, Jenny, put that horrible idea out of your mind. The truth is—I can say so to you—Emily Garlett had become impossible, intolerable——”

“If the man’s a murderer, you’re just trying to find excuses for him,” she said dryly.

“Not excuses,” said Dr. Maclean sharply, “but a reason for his mad and wicked act—yes.”

“And now,” said his wife slowly, “which of us is to tell the child, and what will be the best way to break it to her?”

“I think,” said the doctor hesitatingly, “that you had better tell her, my dear.”

“Perhaps I had, for she’s a bit afraid of me, and she hasn’t a shadow of fear of you!”

But they might have saved themselves the trouble of their painful little discussion, for, when they went into the kitchen, they found that Jean had left the house without saying where she was going.

“I think she saw by my face that there was trouble afoot,” admitted Elsie regretfully, for she just looked at me and said, “You can tell them I’ve gone up to the village.”

“I hope she hasn’t gone to the Thatched House,” said Mrs. Maclean in a dismayed tone.

109“That is just where I feel certain she has gone,” said the cook positively. “It’s all over the village, Mrs. Maclean, that they will be arresting Mr. Garlett this morning. But the poor wean don’t know that.”

Driven by some instinct which she would have shrunk from analysing, Jean Bower was hurrying toward the Thatched House.

It was the first time she was going there alone; but she had been through what had seemed to her a time of measureless suffering this last fortnight, and now had come the breaking point. She felt she must see Harry Garlett—and alone.

“Jean! Jean! Stop!”

It was Miss Prince’s familiar voice, and unwillingly the girl turned and stood at bay.

“You mustn’t go to the Thatched House this morning, my dear.”

A feeling of exasperated anger filled Jean’s already overburdened heart.

“I have something very important to tell Harry before he starts for the factory,” she said quickly.

“I doubt if you’ll find him at home. He probably slept at the factory——”

The older woman looked into the girl’s flushed, rebellious face, with genuine pity and concern.

“I think you ought to know, my dear, that the police came out to the Thatched House while Harry was out last evening. They ransacked everything, and turned out every drawer in the place.”

“Why—why did they do that?” asked Jean falteringly.

Probably for the first time in her life Miss Prince remained silent in answer to a question. She had already heard the rumour that Harry Garlett was to be arrested this morning.

“Let me go to the Thatched House,” she exclaimed, “and if Harry is there I’ll ask him to come out here and speak to you. I don’t think you ought to go there alone, in any case. Think what people would say?”

“I am going there,” said Jean firmly, “and I hope you won’t think me rude, Miss Prince, if I say that I don’t care at all what people say.”

110Without waiting for the other’s answer, she began to run, leaving Miss Prince staring after her.

But after she had gone through the wrought-iron gate, she saw that a little way up the broad path leading to the house the Terriford village policeman was standing, as if barring the way.

Now Jean knew the young man well, for he had an invalid mother whom she sometimes visited.

“Have you business up at the house, miss?” he asked hesitatingly.

She answered, “Of course I have, Jackson, or I shouldn’t be going there,” and walked firmly on.

And then, all at once, with a leap of sudden joy she saw Harry Garlett standing by the open front door of his house. The sight of him brought a feeling of comfort, of reassurance, to her burdened heart. But as he came forward to meet her, she realized that he was in a state of painful excitement and anger.

“I tried to get through to your uncle about half an hour ago,” he exclaimed, “but Elsie said he was out. I wanted to tell him myself of the dastardly outrage committed here last evening! It scared away the cook and her daughter, so I’m alone here.”

He hurried her into the hall, and then throwing his arms round her, he strained her to him.

“It makes all the difference having you with me——”

Poor Jean! Since this great trouble had come upon them all, Mrs. Maclean had seemed to think it almost unseemly for the lovers to be alone together. Even the yew edge walk had become, by her plainly expressed wish, forbidden ground.

It was wonderful to be alone with him like this, heart to heart, and lips to lips; almost too wonderful to be true.

But at last the girl gently withdrew herself from Garlett’s enfolding arms.

“What happened last night?” she asked.

“I suppose I’m a fool to mind,” he answered. “You are the only thing that matters to me now, Jean. But I’d better tell you about it, for you will have to know some time.”

“Yes?” she said, and taking up his hand she laid it against her cheek. Though the mere fact that they were alone 111together brought with it deep comfort as well as a hidden ecstatic bliss of which she was half ashamed, she yet felt not only frightened, but terribly perplexed. What did this that had happened last evening portend?

“The moment I’d turned the corner on my way to Bonnie Doon the police came and ransacked everything here. I’ll show you the state in which those brutes left my study!”

“Who did all this?” she asked.

“I met the Grendon inspector of police and his two underlings at the gate, as I was coming home last night, and he said that they had acted on instructions from London. D’you mind seeing my study, Jean? Everything is exactly as they left it. I want Dr. Maclean to see it—the rector, too! Of course I shall send in a claim for compensation.”

She followed him through the empty house, and then, at the door of what had been an orderly, even a luxurious, room, she stopped, amazed at the sight before her.

The cupboard doors of a large Chippendale bookcase were wide open, and the books had been roughly turned out of the shelves and lay all over the floor. The drawers of the writing table were drawn out as far as they would go, and the top drawer, which had been locked, had been wrenched open with some rough instrument.

As a girl Emily Garlett had collected shells, and her small shell cabinet had been kept in this, her husband’s study. Even that had not been spared rough desecration. The cotton wool on which the shells had rested had been thrown out, and lay in wads on the carpet.

“This is the worst room,” said Harry Garlett quietly. “But my bedroom’s in a pretty queer state, too, and as for the dining room, you’d think burglars had been in it!”

“Did they say what they wanted to find?” asked Jean wonderingly.

“They made a regular mystery of it, and yet they were fools enough to ask that poor old cook and her daughter if they had found any packets of gray or white powder about!”

“Gray or white powder?” she said uncertainly.

“Not salt or pepper—arsenic!” he said bitterly.

Then he again took her in his arms, and kissed her with a passion that half frightened her.

“God! What should I do if I hadn’t you?” he muttered.

112She clung to him, and for a moment they forgot their great trouble.

“Oh, Jean, my darling, darling love—it’s been hell this last fortnight!” he whispered. “D’you know that we’ve never been alone since we came back from London?”

“They’ve been very cruel—though they meant to be kind,” she said in a choking voice.

“Did you feel them cruel?” he whispered.

As only answer she pressed more closely to him, and again in that disordered, desecrated room, it was as if Heaven wrapped them round.

It was Jean who heard the sound of footsteps echoing across the hall; and they had only just time to start apart when a loud voice called out: “Is any one in this house? We are looking for Mr. Henry Garlett——” And two men in uniform burst through the half-open door.

They looked taken aback when they saw that the man they sought was not alone, and the elder of the two came up close to where Harry Garlett was standing by Jean Bower’s side.

He asked civilly, “Can I speak to you in private——?” he hesitated, and then added the word, “sir.”

Harry Garlett exchanged a quick look with the man, and then he turned to Jean. “Will you go outside, into the garden? I’ll join you in a few minutes.”

“Yes, miss, that’s what I advise you to do. You go out into the garden,” the police inspector spoke in a very kindly, respectful, pitying tone.

But Jean had moved closer to her lover’s side. She took his arm, and held it firmly.

“Say what you want to say to Mr. Garlett here,” she said. “I’m not going to leave him.”

“I’m sure the gentleman would rather we had our talk by ourselves, miss.”

Garlett said in a low voice, “He’s right, my dear. I do beg you to leave me.”

She shook her head. “I can’t,” she said piteously. “Don’t be angry with me, Harry.”

He tried to smile. “Nothing could make me angry with you, my darling.”

“Now, miss, can’t I persuade you to go out into the garden?”

113“No,” said Jean. “I’m very sorry, but you can’t.”

“I’m sorry, too,” said the man. “But duty is duty.”

He put his hand lightly on Harry Garlett’s free arm.

“I now arrest you,” he said solemnly, “on a serious charge—that of having murdered your wife, Mrs. Emily Garlett, on the twenty-seventh of last May.”

It was the first time that such a duty had fallen to Inspector Johnson, and he looked far more moved than did the man he had just put under arrest.

“I must warn you,” he went on, “that anything you say henceforth may be used in evidence against you.” And then inconsequently, he added: “Have you nothing to say, Mr. Garlett?”

“The only thing I have to say,” said Harry Garlett, “is that I am innocent.”

He gently freed his arm from Jean Bower’s detaining hand. “You must go home now,” he said quietly, “and tell your uncle and aunt what has happened.”

He turned to the inspector. “I take it, Mr. Johnson, that I shall be allowed all reasonable opportunities of seeing my friends?”

“That is so,” said the man.

Then he made a sign to his subordinate, and they both turned their backs while their prisoner and the girl who loved him bade each other a silent, apparently an unemotional farewell.

But when she got out of doors, in front of the house, Jean suddenly turned faint and giddy; it was as if her mind became a blank. She covered her face with her hands. “Oh, God,” she prayed, “make me keep my reason—and help me to help Harry.”

Then, with steady steps, she walked on, past the pitying young policeman, and past the closed car in which she vaguely realized her lover was about to be taken to Grendon prison.

114
CHAPTER XI
In every human drama where anguish, shame, despair, play a part, there are always certain minor characters who deserve, though they never receive, almost as much sympathy as do the principals in the tragedy.

As the doctor and his wife sat awaiting the return of Jean Bower, they felt as if the whole of their happy, dignified house of life had fallen into ruins about them. Deep in her troubled heart Mrs. Maclean was quite as much concerned with the position of her husband as she was with that of her niece, dearly as she loved the girl. For Jean was young enough to start another life, and, as the years went on, all that was now happening, and about to happen, would become a painful memory and nothing more.

How different the case of her husband—to say nothing of herself!

Already Mrs. Maclean felt as if the doctor had aged perceptibly during the last hour. He was sitting staring into the fire, doing nothing, not even smoking. He had asked her to tell Elsie that he would not be at home this morning to any patients, and that all calls must be telephoned on at once to Dr. Tasker. It was worse, far worse, than if death, unexpected, unheralded, and coming in some peculiarly terrible shape, had entered the house.

The door opened, and they both turned round quickly. Speaking in a hushed voice, Elsie said:

“I thought maybe you’d like to know that a machine has just driven past. There was a policeman on the box, and I’m afraid—I make no doubt—that I saw Mr. Garlett riding inside.”

She did not wait to hear her master’s comment on her piece of news, but, with true delicacy, retreated quickly into her kitchen.

The husband and wife looked at each other, a dozen unspoken questions as to the whereabouts of Jean remaining 115unuttered by either. At last Mrs. Maclean said slowly: “I expect the child will be back in a few minutes; she can’t but know what’s happened.”

“What you expect,” said her husband rather gruffly, “is neither here nor there. What one expects never happens in this life. The only thing of which we may be quite sure is that she won’t have been allowed into the Thatched House. But as to whether she will know that Garlett has been arrested depends on——”

And then as he said the word “on” they heard the front door open and Jean’s steady, quiet voice: “Is Aunt Jenny upstairs, Elsie?” and Elsie’s far more moved tones in answer: “The mistress is with the doctor, Miss Jean, in the dining room.”

Dr. Maclean and his wife stood up—the door opened, and the girl looked from one to the other.

“Harry’s been arrested for the murder of his wife,” she said, “and now we’ve got to arrange for his defence.”

She turned and shut the door behind her.

“I couldn’t help hearing what you said to Elsie before I went out, for I was just coming through the scullery. Was what you wanted to tell me, both of you, anything about Harry?”

And then Mrs. Maclean did a fine thing. She would have given the world to stay where she was, but she told herself that it would be far easier for the girl to endure what had to be said if the two others were alone together, and so, quietly, she left the room.

Jean came over to where the doctor was sitting. And though he still remained silent, she saw his hand make an uncertain movement toward his breast pocket.

“May I see the letter you had this morning? I think I ought to see it, Uncle Jock.”

“Yes,” he said slowly, “I think you ought to see it. And I will go further, my dear, and say you ought to ponder over its contents very carefully.”

He handed her the letter his one-time fellow-student had written, and she read it through—once quickly, and then once very slowly.

At last she let the piece of paper flutter down on to the hearth-rug.

116He scarcely dared look at her, yet at last, when she did speak, there was in her tone a ring of confidence, almost of happy confidence, that somehow irritated him.

“The first thing we’ve go to do,” she exclaimed, “is to get Mr. Kentworthy to come and see us. I don’t know what happens when an innocent man is accused of murder. Who looks after his interests? Would it be Mr. Toogood, the solicitor to the Etna China Company?”

“I suppose Mr. Toogood will be the solicitor in charge of the case,” he answered gravely. “I intend to get a London man.”

She gazed at him surprised. “How d’you mean? Why should you have a solicitor, Uncle Jock?”

He got up. “Because,” he said, looking down into her flushed face, “I gave a wrong death certificate.”

He could not help adding, with a touch of intense bitterness, “I am the simple country doctor who was taken in, and who unwittingly abetted the murderer in his foul deed.”

Then he sat down, heavily, in his armchair by the fire.

She threw herself on her knees on the ground before him. “You don’t mean, you can’t mean, that you think Harry——?”

And there was something so piteous, so terrible, in the eyes that looked up into his that he quailed before that searching accusing glance.

“The one thing we know for certain is that Emily Garlett died as the result of a huge dose of arsenic,” he said quietly.

He stood up, and, putting out his hands, raised her from the ground. “If you want to help this man, you must face the truth, my dear.”

“The truth?” she echoed.

“The truth that the whole world, on the evidence now available, will consider Garlett guilty. You, I understand, believe him to be absolutely innocent?”

“Absolutely innocent,” she repeated, in a steady voice; but in her wide-open eyes there was a look of anguished questioning as to what he believed.

Dr. Maclean could not face that look, and, hardly knowing what he was doing, he walked over to the window and looked out into the wintry garden.

Behind him were uttered tonelessly the words: “Would you mind my sending a telegram to Mr. Kentworthy?”

117He turned round. “Do so, by all means. And then I suppose we’d better go and see Mr. Toogood, and I’ll apply for permission to see Garlett.”

“Do go on calling him Harry, Uncle Jock!”

“I will,” he said quickly. “I will, my dear. But you know that till very lately I always did call him Garlett.”

As she was going towards the door, he called her back. “Do you feel, under the circumstances, that you ought to stay here in Terriford?”

“D’you want me to go away, Uncle Jock?”

He groaned. “Want you to go away? Don’t you know what a difference your coming here has made to me—as well as to your Aunt Jenny? We’ve never talked about it, even to one another, but it’s been the one blot on our happy married life that we had no child. You’ve become our child. Want you to go away!”

She walked up to him and put her hand through his arm. She was very moved, and for one fleeting moment she forgot Harry Garlett.

“Then why,” she faltered, “why did you say that cruel, cruel thing just now, Uncle Jock?—I mean about my leaving Bonnie Doon?”

“Because,” he answered painfully, “if you stay here your life will become unendurable between now and Harry’s trial. Your aunt and I have already talked it over. She suggests you and she going away together to some quiet spot where you can pass as Miss Maclean.”

“But why should I do that?” asked the girl in a bewildered tone. “I don’t understand.”

He looked at her and saw what she said was true—that she was still quite unaware of the tide of noisome gossip which had flowed over her name and her innocent, girlish past since the exhumation of Mrs. Garlett.

“I supposed,” he said slowly, “that you were aware, Jean, of what the people who believe Harry Garlett guilty take to have been his motive.”

He waited a moment, then saw that still no glimmer of his meaning crossed her mind.

“Has it never occurred to you that Harry Garlett is believed to have fallen in love with you before his wife died?”

“No one can believe that.” She spoke with entire conviction. 118“He hardly knew me, and admits that he did not even like me. He would far rather have had some one at the factory quite unconnected with his private life. Why, he almost always turned over to Mr. Dodson any letters to which answers had to be dictated!”

“I’m not telling you what I believe—but what other people believe,” he said in a low voice, and suddenly the full meaning of what his words implied became clear to her.

“I can’t bear it,” she whispered, “oh, Uncle Jock, I can’t bear it!”

As even the best and the kindest of human beings will feel under stress of circumstances, Dr. Maclean gathered a cruel courage from seeing her distress.

“It would be very wrong to conceal from you what you are up against, my dear. As far as the average man and woman can see, Harry Garlett was the only human being in the world who could be affected in the smallest degree by his wife’s death. The question of money is ruled out—there only remains love.”

She turned on him in a flash. “Then you ought to admit his absolute innocence, for you know as well as I do that he was very much vexed with me for having written the letter that brought him back. It took him some time,” she hesitated, “something like a month, before we became even on friendly terms together. After that,” there came a radiant look into her face, “after that I admit he came to love me, though even then——”

She stopped abruptly and covered her face with her hands.

He looked at her eagerly. Was it possible that she was going to reveal some fact hitherto concealed by her that might throw light on the mystery?

“Yes?” he said, “yes, Jean? What happened then?”

“Dr. Tasker happened,” she was smiling through her tears. “But for Dr. Tasker, we might have gone on as we were for a long, long time. Don’t think me unkind, for it wasn’t as if he had ever really cared, but I have often thanked God for Dr. Tasker!”

It was fortunate for her that Jean Bower had no clue to the look which came over Dr. Maclean’s face. He was seeing her in the witness-box, admitting her love for Harry Garlett, unconscious that by so doing she would provide for 119most members of the jury the strongest of all reasons for the crime for which Harry Garlett was on trial for his life.

“And now,” she asked, “may I go and telephone a telegram to Mr. Kentworthy, Uncle Jock?”

A few moments later his wife came into the room. “Jenny,” exclaimed the doctor, “almost has that child convinced me of Harry Garlett’s innocence!”

Ahush, almost of death, over Bonnie Doon. A hush broken by a moment of almost intolerable disappointment, for the reply to the telegram sent to Mr. Kentworthy ran: “Am ill in bed. Will come as soon as possible. Doctor forbids journey for three days.”

Dr. Maclean felt this to be a bad setback, all the worse because somehow it was so entirely unexpected. And what he felt was experienced in a far, far stronger and more anguished degree by Jean Bower. She had pinned all her faith on James Kentworthy. She had felt that he would be the one tower of strength in a world where everything was falling into ruins about her. Her misery was much increased by the suspicion that her uncle was inclined to believe Harry Garlett guilty. She knew only too well the generous warmth he would have shown had he really believed her lover innocent.

At last she suggested timidly that they might go to Grendon and see Mr. Toogood. But to that suggestion he answered irritably, “After all, I can’t wholly neglect my patients.”

“Go out, do, and get that job over!” exclaimed Mrs. Maclean sharply. And he actually went out for his usual round, late in that long, inexpressibly dreary morning, glad that he, at any rate, had something to do, and so was not compelled to sit with his wife and Jean waiting they knew not for what.

At last he came in. They all sat down to their midday meal, and then Dr. Maclean suddenly lost his temper. Looking across the table he had seen Jean surreptitiously pushing the little piece of meat with which her aunt had served her under a salad leaf.

“Look here!” he called out sharply, “you won’t do Harry Garlett any good by starving yourself, Jean. The one hope 120the poor fellow has got is that we should all keep an even keel.”

Jean drew the little piece of meat out into the open again, and ate it.

At last a welcome diversion was caused by Elsie.

“There’s some one on the ’phone, sir, who wants to speak to you urgent. It’s Lawyer Toogood, I’m thinking.”

The doctor jumped up and hurried into his consulting room. “Yes? Who is it?”

“Toogood. I’ve seen Garlett, and I’d rather like to have a few words with you, Maclean. Can you make it convenient to come early this afternoon?”

“Of course I will. And, Toogood, may I bring my niece, Jean Bower?”

“Bring her by all means. But I should like to see you alone first.”

“Can you give me any word of hope?” Dr. Maclean’s voice instinctively lowered.

“Wait till I see you; I don’t like to say much over the ’phone. The town’s in a state of wild excitement. There’s actually a little crowd of people round the door of my office at this moment, just waiting to catch any one who comes in or out!”

And twenty minutes later, the patience of the idle folk who hung about the High Street in the hope of catching a glimpse of some actor in what was already beginning to be called the Terriford Mystery, was rewarded.

Dr. Maclean’s familiar covered-in two-seater dashed up to the fine old red brick house on the door of which was a big brass plate bearing the words, “Toogood, Lane & Co., Solicitors,” and the group of idlers pressed forward to see the girl who was the heroine of the case alight from the car.

“She looks a deep one,” ventured a voice; and then there came the answer from more than one pair of lips, “Ay, ay, so she do!”

Her ordeal, or rather Dr. Maclean’s ordeal, for she was unaware of the glances levelled at her, did not last long, for the doctor and his niece were kept only a moment standing outside the mahogany door.

Mr. Toogood had hurried downstairs as soon as he had heard the two-seater drawing up in the street, and this 121alone would have marked the great importance he attached to the visit, for he was not the man to put himself out unnecessarily.

He shook hands with them both in a perfunctory, hurried way, and then led the way up to the spacious first floor. Once there, he opened the door of a back room:

“Now then, my dear young lady, you go in here! I’m afraid it will be some time before I shall ask you to join us.”

He shut the door on her, and preceded Dr. Maclean into the large front room which, though lined with tin boxes, each of which was inscribed in white letters with the name of some local worthy, might have been the comfortable study of a man of leisure.

On the flat writing table stood a bunch of sweet-smelling hot-house flowers, for Mr. Toogood was a keen gardener.

“Well, Maclean? Sit ye down! This is a grim business, eh?”

Dr. Maclean sat down, and he noticed that Mr. Toogood’s round, genial face was set in hard lines. The two men often had occasion to meet, and sometimes on disagreeable business, but the doctor had never seen the lawyer look as he looked now.

At last the doctor muttered: “I don’t know what to think, Toogood. Perhaps I’ve been lucky—but in the course of my long practice I’ve never even suspected the secret administration of poison.”

“I can’t say the same. I think you’d be surprised if you knew how often I’ve suspected—perhaps I ought to say half suspected—murder! In our line of country the longing for money is the thing that leads to crime.”

“There was nothing of the sort in this case,” exclaimed the doctor. “Garlett had all the money he wanted.”

“I was going on to say,” observed the lawyer, significantly, “that next to money love is the most potent begetter of crime.”

Dr. Maclean remained silent, and the lawyer, fingering a ruler on his table, said musingly:

“Garlett was a very good-looking chap, yet he never seemed to care for women.”

Mr. Toogood unconsciously used the past tense, and Dr. Maclean, noticing that he had done so, felt a slight shock.

122He leaned forward: “D’you think Garlett in real danger, Toogood? I want you to tell me the truth, for it’s of terrible moment to us—because of our niece.”

A change came over the lawyer’s face. “It is indeed!” he exclaimed.

It was a curious fact, but a fact nevertheless, that during the last two or three minutes Mr. Toogood had completely forgotten Jean Bower’s connection with the man now talking to him. His mind had been full of her—but entirely in connection with Harry Garlett. It was as Garlett’s secretary, not as Dr. Maclean’s niece, that he had considered the girl’s unhappy situation.

He told himself that he must go warily, the more so that two or three of the men who had spoken to him of the case that morning had seemed to think it possible that Jean Bower might find herself in the dock with Harry Garlett. He now remembered, with a touch of acute dismay, that a fellow lawyer had actually observed: “I’m told they found no arsenic at the Thatched House—but that young woman, Garlett’s lady love, being a doctor’s niece, must have access to all kinds of poisons, eh?”

So, setting a guard on his tongue, Mr. Toogood came back to the matter in hand.

“You’ll be the most important witness, both before the magistrates and at the trial, Maclean. I suppose you knew Mrs. Garlett very well indeed—not only as her medical man, but as a friend?”

“Yes, I think I can say that,” said the doctor cautiously, “although the poor woman never cared for anybody apart from the man she married. As for female friends—well, Miss Prince was her only intimate acquaintance. She was on bad terms with Mrs. Cole-Wright, and she never cared to see my wife.” The doctor smiled a rueful smile—“Though she was prim and old-fashioned, Emily Garlett liked men very much, more than she did women. The day before she died she had two gentlemen callers—the rector for one, I know.”

“You saw her pretty often, I suppose?”

“Yes, she often sent for me, though there was little I could do for her.”

“You attributed her death to violent indigestion, acting on 123the heart?” queried the lawyer, glancing down at a paper lying on the table before him.

Dr. Maclean hesitated; this was touching on what had already become a very sore subject with him.

“I made a bad break there, Toogood,” he admitted painfully.

“Oh, well, we all make mistakes! It would have been strange indeed had you suspected arsenic.”

He was debating within himself how he could introduce the subject of Jean Bower, when the doctor suddenly gave him a lead.

“I hope my niece won’t be called as a witness,” he observed, with just that touch of alteration in his voice which betrayed to the other’s legal ear that the speaker felt very nervous.

Mr. Toogood did not answer for a few moments, and then he put his two hands on the table and looked keenly across at his visitor. He felt the time had come to speak plainly.

“It’s no use beating about the bush, Maclean. I suppose you know what’s being said in Grendon to-day, and what will be said all over England to-morrow?”

As the doctor remained silent, he went on:

“Your niece is regarded as having provided the only motive for the crime—if crime there was.” And, as the doctor still said nothing, he added: “I’m not telling you anything you didn’t know, or at least suspect—eh, Maclean?”

And then, at last, the other spoke out, “I realize that what you say is true, but, I’d like you to believe, at any rate, that that notion, or suspicion—I don’t know what to call it—is a damned lie, Toogood! That’s God’s truth—though I realize how difficult it will be to make the truth apparent.”

Mr. Toogood took a mouthpiece from off his table and whistled down it, “I’m not to be disturbed on any account.”

Then he got up, walked across to the door, opened it, looked out on to the empty landing, and, shutting the door, came and stood by the doctor.

“Look here, Maclean! I don’t forget the night that you and I spent by our boy’s beside just before he died—or how good you were to me and to my poor wife. That’s why I’m going to do my very best to help you, and to shield that unfortunate girl. But I feel I owe you the truth, and I’m 124afraid—nay, I’m more than afraid—I’m sure that if Garlett committed this awful crime he did it for love of your niece. Even now he can think of nothing else! When I saw him in the prison this morning the first thing he said to me was: ‘I want you to convey a message to Miss Bower, Toogood. I want you to explain to her that I don’t want her ever to come here—to this horrible place.’”

Dr. Maclean opened his mouth to speak, and then he shut it again.

“And that wasn’t all! While I was trying to get out of him something which might be of value when he is brought up before the magistrates, his mind was so full of Miss Bower that he really could hardly attend to what I was saying!”

“They’ve hardly seen one another, and never alone, since the exhumation of Mrs. Garlett’s body,” observed the doctor in a low voice.

The lawyer stared at him.

“They were alone in the Thatched House this morning,” he said abruptly. “I mean when Garlett was arrested.”

“I’m sure that isn’t true,” said the doctor firmly.

“My dear Maclean, it is true. The Inspector came in about quite another matter, and gave me the most moving account of how he found them together in that empty house. He said it would have melted the heart of a stone to see the way the poor girl behaved. She wouldn’t leave Garlett—she clung to him—he said it reminded him of stories he had read of couples in the Indian Mutiny.”

“My God!” exclaimed the doctor, “I knew nothing of this——”

The lawyer pursued his advantage.

“I’m afraid there have been many things of which you have known nothing, Maclean.” Instinctively he lowered his voice: “To my mind, Garlett, who has been starved so long of all natural human emotion, fell in love with your niece at first sight. No doubt the girl was unaware of it for quite a long time. But you’re not going to tell me that last winter, when she first became secretary to his company, Garlett didn’t see enough of her to have a hundred opportunities of finding out how far more attractive she was than his wife?”

125Dr. Maclean remained silent. With a feeling of sick dismay he realized that what the other man said was only too true.

“In a way, for all his jolly, open manner, Garlett was a secretive chap,” went on Mr. Toogood. “I’ve been his lawyer ever since he married, but he’s never talked to me about his private affairs, or consulted me in any way. As a matter of fact Mrs. Garlett was far more businesslike. She knew what she wanted; I always enjoyed a talk with her.” He smiled rather ruefully. “There were no flies on poor Emily——”

“But you must admit,” chipped in the doctor, “that she was never jealous; in that she wasn’t at all true to type, if I may say so.”

“You’re right there!” exclaimed the lawyer. “She simply worshipped that man. Nothing was too good for him. And yet—and yet, there was always something spinsterish about her, eh, Maclean?”

Dr. Maclean nodded: “I know what you mean. It was that which accounted for Garlett’s attitude to the poor soul. His attitude was much more that of a kind and attentive nephew than that of a husband—still, he didn’t seem to mind.”

“Rubbish—stuff! Of course he minded! You and I have met here to-day to look facts in the face. To throw that still young man with an exceedingly attractive, and, I’m told, lively, intelligent girl, was just tempting providence.”

“It’s done every day—in all the business offices in the world,” said the doctor defensively.

Mr. Toogood began toying with some of the papers on his table.

“I’ll tell you one thing I heard last night,” he observed without looking up, “in the bar of the King’s Head Hotel, as a matter of fact. It was asserted that within a week of Mrs. Garlett’s death your niece received by post an anonymous gift of a most beautiful diamond ring. If the purchase of that ring can be traced to Garlett, it will produce a very unpleasant impression at the trial.”

The doctor felt a strange sensation suddenly sweep over him. He had often seen a woman in hysterics, and he had all your medical man’s contempt for that special form of 126disordered feminine nerves, but now he felt as if he himself might easily burst out crying and laughing together.

“That ring,” he exclaimed, “was my wife’s gift to her niece on the girl’s twenty-second birthday. It is a poor little bit of a thing, with a turquoise in the middle and two small pearls, one on either side. One of the pearls had gone dead, and my wife sent it away to have it replaced by a good pearl. So she arranged that the gift should reach our niece anonymously on her birthday. If the stories that are being told of Garlett and Jean are on a level with that story——”

The other raised his hand.

“I should be deceiving you, Maclean, were I to admit that all, or even most of the stories now being told concerning your niece and Garlett are as easily refuted as is apparently this story of the diamond ring. Let us simply take what we know to be true.”

“How d’you mean?”

“What happened after Mrs. Garlett’s death? Garlett gave out he was going away for a long time—perhaps for as long as a year. I thought it odd that he didn’t come to see me, to make the arrangements any ordinary man of business makes when going away for so long a period. But he just sent me a hasty note as to the proving of his wife’s will, and left the very day of the funeral! I thought his conduct very strange then, and I don’t mind telling you now that I hope the other side won’t get hold of it. But there’s one thing we can’t keep from them—that is Garlett’s sudden return at the end of three months. Now why did he do that?”

“Because of old Dodson’s state of health,” replied Dr. Maclean hotly.

“The direct cause of his return was a letter from your niece. He told me that himself the first time I met him.”

“That letter,” said Dr. Maclean sharply, “was written on my advice—in fact she showed me the letter before she sent it off to Garlett. The girl was placed in a very difficult position at the factory.”

“I know that,” said the lawyer quickly. “Everybody knew that it was most awkward for the girl. Old Dodson used to make love to her. I heard about it at the time. I 127believe he went so far as to propose marriage more than once!”

Dr. Maclean stared at Mr. Toogood in amazement. He knew that this was true, but he had thought it was a secret between him and Jean. He had not even told his wife. The other read what was passing in his mind.

“You’re surprised, my good friend, at that fact being known? Probably Miss Jean never told a soul except, perhaps, you——”

The doctor nodded.

“Good God, man! D’you suppose that in such a place as the Etna China factory every thing that happens isn’t known?”

“I hold to it that no one can say Harry Garlett fell in love with my niece before his wife’s death,” said Dr. Maclean firmly.

“I suppose you wouldn’t go so far as to declare that Garlett didn’t fall in love with her the moment he came back, eh?”

“I think he did,” was the reluctant answer, “but I’m convinced he didn’t know it himself.”

“I wish I was as sure of that as you are. But I agree that he wouldn’t have spoken so soon if it hadn’t been that he found that Tasker was after her, eh?”

Dr. Maclean stared in fresh astonishment at the lawyer. “There’s very little going on hereabouts that I don’t know,” remarked Mr. Toogood.

There was a pause, then: “Whom are you going to get to defend Garlett?” asked Dr. Maclean eagerly, “or haven’t you yet made up your mind?”

The other smiled—a superior smile. “The moment I learned that Garlett was to be arrested I got a call through to our London agents and I secured Sir Harold Anstey.”

“The man who got Mrs. Panford off?”

“Of course! He’s the greatest of living advocates, and at first I was afraid there was going to be a hitch. The man’s so gorged with money and success that he can pick and choose his cases——”

Dr. Maclean looked uncomfortable.

“Surely you don’t think we could have done better?” asked the lawyer, nettled.

128“I suppose not—and yet, Toogood, only last week I read somewhere that Anstey’s nickname is ‘the murderer’s friend.’ We don’t want to condemn Garlett beforehand, eh?”

Mr. Toogood leaned forward.

“It will take the whole of Sir Harold Anstey’s wit and skill to save our man from the gallows. Make no mistake about that! Still, there’s one hopeful feature. I’ve found out—unofficially, of course—that the Crown people have been in touch with every chemist in every place where our friend ever played cricket in the last ten years! But they’ve found nothing.”

“Then they haven’t traced arsenic in any form to Garlett’s possession?” asked the doctor eagerly.

“So far that’s the one missing link—and a very important link it is! By the way, you’ve never had a dispensary, have you?”

The question was asked carelessly, but the doctor knew very well what was in the lawyer’s mind, and his thoughts flew to the other side of the book-lined wall to his left—to the room where Jean Bower was sitting, waiting for this long interview to end.

“No,” he said quietly, “I have never had a dispensary, Toogood. For what it’s worth, I may tell you that I make it a rule to keep no drugs in my house at all. Were it otherwise, I should be constantly worried by the village people. When I prescribe anything of the kind they’ve got to trudge into Grendon to get it.”

It was on the tip of his tongue to mention Miss Prince and her amateur doctoring, but he refrained. After all, Miss Prince, whatever her special knowledge, could no more procure poison than could the simplest cottage wife in Terriford village. So, after a moment’s pause, he only added: “How about a statement from me, Toogood?”

“I think we had better let the Crown people see you first,” said the solicitor thoughtfully. “After all, you’ve nothing to conceal. So it may be better for you to be a Crown witness friendly to our side.”

Both men stood up.

“I should like to ask you one delicate question, Maclean”; the lawyer hesitated, then went on: “Of course you are aware 129that the fellow who got up this case originally—I mean Kentworthy—procured a deposition stating that Garlett and some young woman used to meet in a wood at night last spring. Are you certain that that young woman was not your niece? Forgive me for asking the question. I won’t press it, if you’d rather not answer.”

“I’d stake my life that it was not my niece!” exclaimed the doctor.

“Without going quite so far as that, I’m inclined to agree with you, and it confirms a view I’ve formed in the last few hours.”

“What view is that?” asked Dr. Maclean, eagerly.

“My view,” said the solicitor quietly, “is that there was a second woman in Garlett’s life. A woman who was never seen in Terriford at all—whom he probably came to know years before he ever saw your niece. If he had some secret married woman friend who had, say, lately become a widow, we have a second person who may have had an interest in Mrs. Garlett’s death.”

“That seems very far-fetched,” observed the doctor.

“In a murder case, nothing is too far-fetched if it throws an element of doubt into the jury’s mind.”

“I see what you mean,” said the other doubtfully.

“Has any one turned up yet to take a statement from Miss Bower?”

Dr. Maclean was taken much aback by the ominous question.

“D’you mean,” he exclaimed, “that my niece can be compelled to be a witness at Garlett’s trial for murder?”

“She’ll be a leading witness,” was the answer. “I thought you realized that.”

“She never even saw Mrs. Garlett,” said the doctor in a low voice.

“Miss Bower will not be questioned as to her relations with Mrs. Garlett, but with Mrs. Garlett’s husband,” observed Mr. Toogood.

Dr. Maclean groaned.

“It’s hard, Maclean, but if your view is the right one, if the girl is absolutely innocent of any wrong-doing, she’ll come through all right. I’m a firm believer in the old saying that ‘Truth will out—even in an affidavit!’ And now we’d 130better have her in, for I must give her that message from poor Garlett.”

He left the room, and a moment later returned with Jean Bower.

“I had a talk with Mr. Garlett this morning, and he asked me to tell you that he hopes you will make no effort to see him while he is in prison, Miss Bower.”

As a look of deep unhappiness flooded her quivering face, he added hastily:

“I’m sure he is acting in the wisest, as well as in the kindest, way for both of you. Though I should not have suggested his message, I heartily approve of his having sent it.”

“Shall I be able to write to him freely? Or will our letters be read?” she asked.

“I’m afraid that your letters will all be perused by the governor. Mr. Garlett is allowed to communicate with me, as his legal adviser, quite privately, and I think it possible that Dr. Maclean may be allowed to see him alone. But with regard to you—well, I doubt if even a wife’s letters are given unopened to a prisoner.”

“I see,” said the girl dully.

“But that must not prevent your writing him cheerful letters,” went on the solicitor. “The great thing you’ve got to do is to keep up the man’s spirits. Your uncle here tells me that you are absolutely convinced of Mr. Garlett’s innocence?”

She was too choked with tears to do more than nod.

“We have a splendid counsel—the best, I think I may say, in Europe. I’m sure you’ve heard of Sir Harold Anstey?”

Now Jean Bower had also seen a photograph of the famous advocate in a picture paper, and underneath the portrait had been printed the words: “Sir Harold Anstey, affectionately known at the Bar as ‘the murderer’s friend.’”

“Sir Harold is a wonderful man,” went on Mr. Toogood eagerly; “I shall never forget having seen him once in court. It was in the great Panford case. There didn’t seem a hope for the woman in the dock, but he got her off! He has an astonishing way with a jury.”

“I see,” said Jean, again in that toneless, dull voice.

“And then there’s another thing. It’s everything for a witness to have Sir Harold with him or her. I suppose—” 131he hesitated uncomfortably—“I suppose, Miss Bower, that you realize that a gentleman will soon come from London in order to take a statement from you. On that statement you will be examined and cross-examined—so you must be careful what you say or admit when answering his questions.”

“I quite understand that.”

Jean had already regained her composure, and it was well that she had done so, for, as Mr. Toogood escorted his important visitors down to the front door, by some curious accident every human being in the substantial house happened at that moment either to have business in the hall, or to be standing at one of the doors that gave into the hall.

The lawyer felt vexed. And yet——? Yet even he felt the general excitement contagious. He could not help being glad that his firm was about to play a prominent part in what was evidently going to be a famous case. It was also satisfactory to reflect that Harry Garlett, unlike the vast majority of criminals, was a wealthy man, and that the huge costs were thus certain to be paid.

Even so, as he walked upstairs back to his own room, Mr. Toogood told himself that Jean Bower was the last kind of young woman for whom he would have been tempted to commit murder twenty years ago. She seemed so quiet, so dull, so unemotional.

Mr. Toogood recalled the last time he had been out to Terriford. It had been to take the poor doomed woman’s instructions as to her will. She had only a few thousand pounds to leave, for she had settled the bulk of her fortune on her husband years ago. And suddenly he reminded himself that neither he nor the doctor had mentioned Miss Agatha Cheale, one of Mrs. Garlett’s legatees, who had been actually present at her death. She would be a witness, and an important witness, for the defence, for she, at any rate, could testify as to the excellent terms on which the husband and wife had been.

132
CHAPTER XII
Elsie, the cook, was an early riser and worker, but even she had been exhausted by the doings of the long day on which Harry Garlett had been arrested. So she came down later than usual the next morning.

It was still rather dark, so she turned on the electric light, and, after she had lit the fire and put on a kettle of water, she began bustling about the kitchen.

All at once, and for the first time in her life, she gave a suppressed scream, for three pale faces were glued to the kitchen window, and for an awful moment she thought they were the spirits of dead men.

Then the woman’s strong good sense asserted itself. Spirits don’t wear great coats and billy-cock hats. Looking straight into the three staring faces, she hurried to the front door and unlocked it. At once the three men faced about and stood before her, and, in the hazy morning light, she saw the motor which had brought them standing outside in the road.

The youngest of the strange-looking visitors, a “cocky-looking young man,” so Elsie told herself, took off his hat and held out his hand; but Elsie kept her hands down.

“Is it the doctor you’re wanting?” she said, sharply. “And what d’you mean by behaving so unmannerly? You gave me the fright of my life—if it’s any pleasure to you to know it.” And then, to her indignation and surprise, the cocky young man bent a little forward, took up her right hand and pressed into it a pound note.

“We want five minutes’ talk with Miss Jean Bower,” he said in a husky whisper. “Don’t think we’re going to frighten the young lady, or insult her in any way—we only want a few moments, which will be all to her advantage. Can you conveniently manage that for us?”

Elsie crunched up the pound note and flung it straight at his face. To her regret it did not touch either of his eyes, it only hit his nose.

133“How dare you offer me your dirty money?” she exclaimed. “You make yourself scarce, young man, or I’ll go and ring up the police!”

“The police won’t be able to help you,” but he spoke with less assurance. “We have a perfect right to try to see this young lady. In fact, as I hinted just now, it will be better for her, and better for Harry Garlett, too, for her just to see us and tell us her side of the story. We each represent a big London paper.—Crawford?” A tall, fair youth stepped forward. “Let me introduce the Live Wire!”

Elsie could not but feel thrilled. This was the first time she had ever seen a newspaper man.

“Now then, Angus—don’t be shy!”

The oldest man of the three, in answer to that remark, moved a little nearer.

“I think it will be to the poor girl’s advantage to see us,” he said gently.

“He’s the Sunbeam—a bad poet in his rare moments of leisure, and, I take it, a fellow countryman of yours, Mrs. Housekeeper!”

There was something boyish about the impudent young fellow, and Elsie unconsciously melted a little. Also she had been impressed by the few words uttered by “Angus.” There might be something in what he said.

“You all go up to the village,” she said suddenly, “and put in an hour at ‘The Pig and Whistle.’ Then you come back here. By then I’ll have told the doctor what you say. Maybe he’ll let Miss Jean see ye.”

The three men consulted together, and then the man who had not yet spoken, he of the Live Wire, came forward.

“Look here,” he began, “if we do that—I admit we’ve no business to come and disturb you so early—can we rely on you that no one will get in before us? I and my friends here came down from London last night, determined to be the first in the field. All we ask is some kind of statement from Miss Bower. She’ll have to give one sooner or later to the press, and we represent three big papers. We don’t want to be let down by some fellow who stayed in bed up to the last minute and had a good breakfast before starting on this job.”

“I think I’ll go so far as to promise ye that no one else 134will see the doctor or Miss Jean before you come back. Will that satisfy ye?”

And then the Scotsman came close up to her.

“Look here,” he said in a low voice, “I’m sure you could tell me something that would be worth while hearing? What sort of a girl is this young lady who’s brought all the trouble about? You must know the truth—if any one knows it.”

Elsie looked at him shrewdly.

“Look here, my bonny man,” she ordered, “you just go and join the other two. You won’t get anything more out of me because you come from Aberdeen, and don’t you be expecting of it!”

“Though you’re so unkind to me, I’ll be kind to you,” he answered significantly. “See that every door and window in this house is tight shut this morning. There’s a swarm of reporters coming out from Grendon. The public is just thirsting for a good murder mystery,” and then he ran off to join the other two, who were already in the car.

Hurrying through her kitchen Elsie slipped the bolt in the back door which gave into the scullery, and glad was she that she had done so when a few minutes later there came a loud knock on the bolted door. She started so violently that she nearly dropped the kettle of boiling water she had taken off the fire.

But it was only the milkman, who had been amazed to find the door locked against him. He and Elsie were old cronies, but when he ventured on just a word—and it was a kindly word, too—with regard to Miss Jean, she answered him so roughly that he was quite offended.

“You needn’t bite my head off,” he said in an injured tone. “Nobody talks of anything else in Terriford, and no more they won’t till that fine gentleman, Mr. Harry Garlett, has been strung up. I’d go a good way to see ’im hanged, that I would! Think of all the trouble he’s brought on your poor young lady—to say nothing of the good doctor and his missus.”

“And what if I say that I believe Mr. Garlett to be innocent?” asked Elsie pugnaciously.

“I should say your ’eart, cook, was better than your understanding,” he answered tolerantly.

135It was an hour later, nearly nine o’clock, when Mrs. Maclean touched her still sleeping husband. She had got up at the usual time, for all that they had talked till two in the morning, debating every point of the mysterious and terrible business with which they were now so closely and so painfully connected.

“Jock?” she said in a low voice, “it’s time to get up.”

He opened his eyes.

“What’s that you’re saying? I wish you’d let me sleep a little longer, Jenny.”

“Well, so I should have done——” and then she stopped short.

Walking across to the window, she drew the blind a little way up. “Get out of bed for a minute, and come over here,” she exclaimed.

Together, in silence, husband and wife gazed out on what was to them a most surprising sight. The drive up to their front door, as well as the road beyond, was blocked with vehicles—old-fashioned flys and motors, closed and open. In one of the cars a man was standing with a huge camera bracketed on the house.

“My God!” exclaimed Dr. Maclean, and then with a groan, “I suppose we must expect this kind of thing, Jenny, till we’ve got that child away.”

“Ay,” she answered. “This will surely show her that she can’t stay here. But I’m glad she’s having her breakfast in bed this morning.”

As they gazed down they saw one man after another came up to their front door, try the handle, look up at the knocker and then walk away.

“Whatever can Elsie have done to prevent their knocking and ringing the house down?”

“She has put a notice on the knocker,” said Mrs. Maclean, in a low voice. “Three London newspaper men were here at seven, it seems, but she persuaded them to go away. They told her there would be a lot of men out by nine o’clock, so she tied a label on the knocker, with ‘Please do not knock or ring bell’ written on it. But she has one of the kitchen windows open, poor woman, though it’s a bitterly cold day, and she just parleys with them through it. We shall have a lot to thank Elsie for, Jock, when all this trouble’s over.”

136“I’ll get up now,” he said, shivering not so much with cold as with horror at the thought of what did, indeed, lie before them.

“I’ve got your bath nice and hot.”

He took her hand and patted it. “Now you go down and tell Elsie that I’ll deal with these gentry as soon as I’m up.”

“I’ve arranged for your breakfast to be brought up here on a tray. You may as well wait till you’ve had that.”

“Perhaps I might,” he agreed.

“They’re all round about the house,” she went on, “their faces just glued to the windows trying to get a glimpse of Jean.”

The doctor had just finished his hasty breakfast when there came a knock at the bedroom door and Elsie appeared.

“Please, sir,” she said in a hesitating voice, “the three men who came very early this morning have come back. They’re from big papers, and I’m thinking ’twould be best for ye to see them. I promised no one should see ye before them.”

He looked at her sternly.

“You had no business to make such a promise, Elsie. I do not wish to see anybody.”

“I’m afraid that ye’ll be well advised to see them,” she said in a subdued tone; “their newspapers are read a lot in these parts, sir.”

He got up. “You’re a wise woman, Elsie. I’ll take your advice. Are they in my study?”

“Oh, no, sir. They’d be seen there. I’ve got them in the scullery.”

And it was standing in the cold, dark scullery, in which he had not been for years, that Dr. Maclean confronted the three inquisitive strangers, his anger breaking out afresh that he should be subjected to so horrible and degrading an ordeal.

As to the one thing they all so eagerly desired, he was absolutely firm.

“It is quite impossible for you to see my niece. And if you did see her, there is nothing which she could say to you that I cannot say. Ask me any questions you like, and I will try to answer them truthfully.”

And then they did ask him questions, foolish questions 137and wise questions, dangerous questions and harmless questions, clever questions and stupid questions! The doctor was too new to the game to ask them to read over to him what they had been writing down so busily. But at last, with infinite relief, he shook hands with each of the three and let them out, one by one, into the little yard from which ran a separate way to the high road.

He was going through the kitchen, when they were startled by a loud, imperative double knock on the knocker which, so far, no one had touched that morning. The front door bell also pealed through the house.

“You wait just inside here, sir. I’ll go to the door. I’ve got it on the chain. No one can force their way in.”

Elsie purposely left the kitchen door open, and soon the doctor heard a stern voice say:

“Please take off the chain and admit me at once. I’m a police inspector sent down by the Director of Public Prosecutions. I’ve come to take statements from Miss Jean Bower and Dr. Maclean.”

The tone of the speaker was not pleasant. But a moment later, to Dr. Maclean’s relief, he heard the same voice apparently addressing a small crowd of men who had gathered round him. They could be seen through the window of the kitchen edging closer and closer to the now open front door.

“If you newspaper people don’t show a little more good feeling and decent regard in such a case as this we shall have a Bill put through Parliament making it illegal to take any photograph or any interview in connection with any murder case as yet untried! That wouldn’t suit some of you, I reckon? There’s nothing doing this morning, apart from what I’ve come to do, so I advise you to be off.”

Dr. Maclean heard Elsie’s voice: “If you’ll come into the doctor’s consulting room, sir, I’ll go and tell him that you’re here.”

“I should like to see Miss Bower.”

“Miss Bower’s still in bed sir.”

“I shall have to see her in bed, if she’s not inclined to get up.”

“I’m sure she’ll get up, sir. Will you please come this way?”

138Very different from James Kentworthy was the man whom the doctor greeted a moment later. He was tall and thin, with a clever stern face.

“My name is Fradelle, Dr. Maclean. And it is my duty to take from you and from Miss Jean Bower the statements which will be used by the Crown in the forthcoming inquiry concerning the death of Mrs. Emily Garlett.”

“I will, of course, put all the information in my power before you,” answered the doctor quietly. “But is it really necessary that you should take a statement from my niece?”

“Most certainly it is. I understand that Miss Bower is in bed. That does not mean, I presume, that you consider her too ill to give me a statement to-day?”

“No,” said Dr. Maclean, “I could not honestly say that. But the girl is terribly distressed, Mr. Fradelle.” He hesitated and then added, “She believes Mr. Garlett to be absolutely innocent.”

“So I understand,” said the other dryly.

An hour later, Dr. Maclean, getting out of the chair where he had sat while he was being interrogated, exclaimed, “I will fetch my niece, Mr. Fradelle.”

The early morning mist had cleared away; it was a brilliant sunny day, so brilliant as to seem to mock the doctor’s feeling of despondency and distress.

Every question put to him had seemed deadly in its import—how different from that first interrogation from James Kentworthy!

The most relentless duel of words—and a duel it had been between those two men, shut up in that cozy, shabby, consulting room—had concerned the strawberries eaten by Mrs. Garlett the evening preceding the night of her death. At first the doctor had not seen the trend of the younger man’s questions, as he had assented, without much thought, to a statement that Mrs. Garlett had been given the strawberries by her husband.

Then suddenly he had exclaimed, “You realize that I’m not speaking from knowledge, but only from hearsay, Mr. Fradelle?”

The other seemed taken aback. “How do you mean, doctor?”

139“I was simply told by Miss Cheale that Garlett had probably given them to the poor lady.”

“Even so, I presume that you have no doubt Garlett did give his wife the strawberries?”

“Well——”

The doctor hesitated a moment; he was tired and somewhat confused. At last he replied evasively: “Garlett strongly denies that he even saw the little dish of strawberries, and he further asserts that, knowing how delicate was his wife’s digestion, nothing would have made him give them to her so late in the evening.”

Mr. Fradelle frowned. He consulted his notes.

“There seems very little doubt that the arsenic was administered in the sugar spread over the strawberries. Still, from what you now say, there seems to be no direct evidence at all as to who gave the strawberries to the poisoned woman?”

“The one person who could give you authentic information as to what happened on the evening before Mrs. Garlett’s death is Miss Agatha Cheale, who was Mrs. Garlett’s housekeeper-companion.”

“I hope to see this Miss Cheale as soon as I am back in London,” said Mr. Fradelle. “I made two attempts to see her the day before yesterday. I tried at the place where she has a flat, and then I went to the office where she works, but I was unfortunate both times. I take it to be unlikely that the defence have got hold of her yet?”

“They may have done so,” said the doctor dubiously, “She was on very good terms with both Mr. and Mrs. Garlett. In fact Miss Cheale is, in some way, related to Mr. Garlett. I think it would be very painful to her to be among the witnesses for the prosecution—though not more painful, I feel sure, than it is to myself,” he concluded ruefully.

“I take it Miss Jean Bower will be an unwilling witness, Dr. Maclean?”

“I know that my niece will be a truthful witness——” he looked rather straight at the thin tight-lipped man who sat with his back to the light, in shadow.

“I trust so, though a woman witness is seldom as truthful—perhaps I ought to say as straightforward—as would be a man in her place. Too often your honest, truthful 140woman witness is such a fool that, without meaning it, she gets confused and begins to lie!”

“My niece is not at all that sort of woman,” said the doctor coldly.

Perhaps the last words uttered by Dr. Maclean prejudiced the stranger, for the glance he cast on the pale, sad-faced girl who a few moments later entered the room was far from kindly.

Jean Bower walked over to her uncle’s writing-table and sat down in his big chair.

She looked such a little slip of a thing that even a harder man than was Mr. Fradelle might have been moved by her look of fragility, deep sadness, and youth. But, like so many clever people, the Crown inquisitor was one of those men who find it difficult to change their minds. He had made up his mind that Jean Bower was the villain of the piece. He felt convinced that it was for love of this girl that Garlett had committed a cruel crime. Far from having any wish to spare her, he hoped to convict her lover, if not herself, out of her own mouth.

“Miss Bower,” he began, in a rasping, unpleasant tone, “I must ask you to give me your whole attention, and I want no wordy explanations. What is required are straight, simple answers to what I think you will admit to be straight, simple questions.”

Jean bent her head. She felt not only frightened, but utterly lonely and forlorn.

“You are, I believe, aware that you are to be among the witnesses called by the prosecution, that is, by the Crown, at the forthcoming trial of Henry Garlett for the murder of his wife. I want you to understand quite clearly that you will be examined on what you tell me to-day—examined, that is, by the prosecution and cross-examined by the defence.”

Jean Bower was in the condition in which many a poor wretch must have been during those periods of the world’s history when such an examination as she was about to undergo was always carried out with the aid of physical torture. While determined to say nothing that could implicate the man she loved, she felt too oppressed and bewildered to make full use of her wits.

He looked at the paper he held in his hand. “You became 141secretary to the Etna China Company last April? I take it that you were already acquainted with Mr. and Mrs. Garlett before you obtained that appointment?”

“I did not know Mrs. Garlett,” she answered in a toneless voice. “But I had seen Mr. Garlett two or three times. My aunt had taken me to call on him at the Etna China factory, and I had seen him walking about the village.”

“Come, Miss Bower”—his voice was at once stern and contemptuous—“you are, I understand, Dr. and Mrs. Maclean’s adopted daughter? Do you mean to tell me that you were not acquainted with the lady who was your uncle’s principal patient?”

“I lived with my father in the north of England till last February, and though I always accompanied Dr. and Mrs. Maclean on their holidays, I had not been in Terriford since I was a child.”

She looked at him quite straight.

“While I was doing war work I took no holidays. My father worked himself literally to death, as did so many men who were too old to join up. After the war he became an invalid, and I nursed him till his death, just a year ago.”

“I see. By a strange chapter of accidents you had not been to Terriford for many years till you came here to live last winter?”

“That is so.”

“But after you’d become secretary to the Etna China Company I take it you saw Mr. Garlett constantly, he being managing director of the business?”

“Yes, I used to see him quite often—not every day, but on most days.” She nearly added—“Most of my work lay with Mr. Dodson,” but something made her refrain from even making that true statement of fact.

“Now, Miss Bower”—he waited for some seconds, while she remained silent—“I’m going to ask you a question which I fear will be very disagreeable to you. I cannot force you to answer it truly, but I advise you in your own interest to do so.”

She said nothing, and he went on:

“Did Mr. Garlett, during the month that elapsed between your coming to the works and his wife’s death, ever make any improper advances to you?”

142Twice she opened her mouth to speak, and twice the one word “Never!” she wished to utter, would not come.

She was bitterly angered and shocked by the blunt question, and to the man who gazed into her now flushed and quivering face her silence proclaimed, if not her own guilt, then certainly that of the man who would soon be on his trial for murder.

Perhaps because he felt he had scored a great point he went on in a kindlier tone:

“I’m sorry to have to press you about this matter, but it is far better you should tell me now than have it dragged out of you when you are in the witness-box. I suppose I may take it, Miss Bower, that there were”—he hesitated, then brought out awkwardly the words—“love passages, no doubt of a comparatively harmless kind, between yourself and Mr. Garlett?”

She started to her feet.

“There were no love passages,” she cried passionately, “none, none at all! I hardly knew Mr. Garlett. Oh! do believe that! Indeed, indeed it’s the truth!” More calmly she added: “The cricket season was beginning, and he was constantly away from home.”

“And yet you told me just now that you saw him most days at the factory?”

“He used to come in for a few moments to see his letters. I was generally present when he did come in, with the man who really managed the business—Mr. Dodson.”

He glanced down at the paper he was holding.

“And yet,” he observed, “slight as was your acquaintance with your employer, you walked back with him from Grendon to Terriford the day before Mrs. Garlett’s death. Or do you deny having done that?”

She sat down again.

“Did I?” she said falteringly. And then she exclaimed—while he told himself that she was perhaps the best actress he had ever encountered in the course of his work—“Yes, I did! I remember it now. We came in to Miss Cheale’s sitting room just when she had dismissed a servant. But for that I should not have remembered having walked home with Mr. Garlett.”

“Now that your memory has become more clear, Miss 143Bower, I want you to remember something else. At what time—I mean about what date—was the word ‘marriage’ first mentioned by Mr. Garlett with respect to yourself?” He leaned forward. “Was it before Mrs. Garlett’s death, or immediately after it?”

Again she looked at him quite straight. She could see his shadowed face—to her it was the face of a sneering devil.

“The first time we actually spoke of our marriage,” she gave a quick, convulsive sigh, “was in answer to a question asked by my aunt the day after we had come to an understanding, early in November.”

“Come, come!” he exclaimed roughly, “that is what a mere man calls quibbling, Miss Bower. You know what I mean!”

“I do not know what you mean. If you mean did Mr. Garlett ever make love to me before his wife’s death, I answer, ‘No, never!’ He has told me since that instead of liking me, as many a man may like a young woman in his employment, he disliked me. He thought me too—too—” she sought for a word, and then faltered out the word “‘self-assured.’ The person who liked me, who tried to make love to me, was old Mr. Dodson.”

She covered her face with her hands. “Why do you force me to say these horrible, degrading things?” she asked brokenly.

He felt embarrassed, even perhaps slightly ashamed.

“You are making my task difficult, Miss Bower. Believe me, I have no wish to make you say anything either horrible or degrading. But it is my duty to ask you certain painful questions.”

He went on, in a more conciliatory tone. “I am to take it, then, that Henry Garlett never made love to you at all till the day when he became engaged to you early last November?”

“Yes,” she said, looking up, “that is the truth.”

“You ask me to believe”—but there was no jeering touch in his voice now—“that Mr. Garlett asked you to become his wife with no preliminary love passages at all?”

“Yes,” she said steadily. “I ask you to believe that, because it is true. After Mr. Garlett’s return, when we had worked together for some two months, seeing each other constantly, there came a day—a day——”

144She could not go on.

He said quickly, “You mean that there came a day when he realized that he loved you—that is what you want me to understand?”

She bent her head.

He got up and went and stood opposite the writing table, so that for the first time she was able to see him quite clearly.

“I formally ask you if Mr. Garlett ever made love to you before his wife’s death, or ever spoke to you of marriage till within the last few weeks?”

“He never did.”

“You will be ready to swear to both those statements in the witness box?”

“Yes.”

He came round to where she was standing.

“Will you read what I have written?” he asked. “As you see, it has boiled down to very little, but I wish to be quite sure that I have got everything quite correct?”

She read down the two sheets of bold, clear handwriting.

“Yes,” she said, “that is exactly what I have said.”

She was surprised that he had put it all down so fairly, so truthfully.

“If you wish to modify or alter anything I have written down here, I will come and take any fresh statement you may wish to make. You understand that perjury is a most serious criminal offence?”

145
CHAPTER XIII
On the arrest of a man for murder he is taken before the magistrates at the earliest possible opportunity, but only to be formally charged—that is, evidence of arrest is given, and a remand, generally for a week, is asked for and obtained.

During that long week Dr. Maclean was the least unhappy of the unhappy inmates of Bonnie Doon because he was forced to follow his profession. The fact that Harry Garlett—it was taken as a fact—had poisoned his wife for love of Jean Bower did not prevent men and women in the neighbourhood falling ill and sending for the doctor. Indeed, quite a number of his old patients suddenly developed some kind of slight complaint in order that he or she might have the intense satisfaction of a short talk with Jean Bower’s uncle.

At first Dr. Maclean had keenly resented these strange manifestations of inquisitive human nature, and he dreaded the questions which he knew would be put to him. But after two or three days he became quite accustomed to the usual opening:

“Dr. Maclean, I hope you won’t be offended if I say how very, very sorry I feel for you and for Mrs. Maclean over this terrible Garlett business. I hardly like to ask you what you really think about Harry Garlett, but you and I are such old friends I’m sure you won’t mind my asking?”

From the first he had taken up a line to which he steadfastly adhered: “I should much like to tell you my theories—but if I am to be a witness next week, when Mr. Garlett is brought up before the magistrates, it would not only be unprofessional but very wrong for me to say anything at all to you about the case.”

As was only natural, nine times out of ten, the lady—for it was generally a lady who asked him the indiscreet 146question—afterward told her husband, her friends, and her acquaintances, that Dr. Maclean, though he was too kind to say so, undoubtedly believed Harry Garlett guilty, for the simple reason that had he thought Garlett innocent there was no reason in the world why he should not have said so right out.

But if Dr. Maclean found it far from easy to put off his patients, his real trouble in connection with the painful mystery with which all their hearts were filled was with his one-time happy home.

Jean Bower’s eyes followed him about as a dog’s eyes follow his master. She never actually asked him to declare his belief in her lover’s innocence, yet he always felt that she was asking him, mutely, for some such declaration.

At last, feeling he could bear her speechless interrogation no longer, he put his arm round her shoulder and said very quietly: “It’s no good, Jean! I’m an honest man, and I can’t deceive you. I would like with all my heart to feel sure that Harry is absolutely innocent, but the truth is I can’t make up my mind.”

As for Mrs. Maclean, she longed to talk the whole matter out with Jean, but her Scotch reserve kept her silent. Even Elsie said nothing, but more than once Jean heard her administer a vigorous, well-directed snub at some one who tried to engage her in conversation at the back door on what had now become the forbidden subject at Bonnie Doon.

But if that strange, unnatural silence was preserved in Dr. Maclean’s house, that was not the case anywhere else. Within a circuit of thirty miles round, Harry Garlett and his affairs were discussed constantly, and that by men and women of every class and kind, of every social position, of every degree of poverty and wealth. Strange rumours flew hither and thither, some of them absurdly false.

One fact gradually emerged. Little by little it became known that no arsenic had been traced to the possession of the man now lying under remand in Grendon prison. This was the missing link in the chain of circumstantial evidence which, it was beginning to be believed, would certainly in the end hang the famous cricketer. Meanwhile, not only the local papers, but the great London papers had become busy over the case. Harry Garlett’s special interest in life, his 147wonderful cricketing records, his popularity, his character as an employer, everything and anything that touched on his personality, was made the subject of comment.

Often during that long week Jean Bower felt as though she had fallen into a bath of ill-smelling mud from whose stains she would never be wholly cleansed. British law considers a man innocent until he is proved guilty, but it is amazing what the English language can do in the way of innuendo, and that without in any way sailing too near the dangerous law of libel.

Half way through that terrible week of waiting suspense there came to Jean one happy hour. Dr. Maclean had insisted that the girl should go out with him, if only to get a little fresh air, and they were both coming in tired from a long round when they saw Elsie’s face at the kitchen window. Before the doctor had time to jump out of his two-seater she was at the door.

“Mr. Kentworthy has arrived, sir. He’s with the mistress in the dining room. She has given him some tea. He’s fair longing to see you and Miss Jean!”

Mr. Toogood would have been surprised had he seen how utterly the girl who now walked quickly forward into the dining room of Bonnie Doon had changed in looks from the sad, listless, pale young creature to whom he had delivered her lover’s message a few days before. Mr. Kentworthy grasped her hand warmly and his eyes twinkled as he exclaimed:

“I’ve got up from my sick-bed in spite of my wife’s protests. I said to Mrs. Kentworthy, ‘Now, this is just the sort of job I’m going to enjoy thoroughly—clearing an innocent man of a foul charge’—for that’s what we’re going to do, Miss Bower. We may have a difficult task before us, but there are already several very important points in our favour.”

“Yes,” chimed in Mrs. Maclean, “Mr. Kentworthy has been telling me that the Crown, in spite of the limitless money at their disposal, have failed to trace any arsenic to Harry’s possession. But I’m astonished to hear that there’s arsenic in almost everything in use. Did you know that?” She turned to her husband.

148“Of course I did,” he answered curtly.

“Even in chocolate,” went on Mrs. Maclean, with a touch of excitement. “Every chocolate manufacturer has a certain amount of arsenic allowed him by the Government—so much per ton of chocolate.”

“That’s why it’s lucky for us, my dear madam, that Mr. Garlett made china instead of sweets,” exclaimed the private detective, smiling. “And now,” he said, turning to Dr. Maclean, “I suppose we must get down to business. Shall we go into your study, sir? I have got your former statement to me here. We must go over the whole thing again, and I want you to put your mind to telling me anything—however small or apparently unimportant—that may be of value to us.”

But in spite of skilful cross-examination and shrewd suggestive questioning, the hour which followed in Dr. Maclean’s consulting room yielded little or no fresh material for Mr. Kentworthy to work upon, and at last he said:

“I wonder, sir, if you would mind my seeing Miss Bower alone? She is more likely to talk frankly to me if there are none of her family present.”

Dr. Maclean looked dubious.

“I don’t believe that would be the case with my niece,” he replied. “But it shall be as you wish, Mr. Kentworthy. Talk to the girl frankly—as frankly as you have talked to me. For one thing she deserves frankness.” He added, in a rather shamefaced voice, “I take it, Mr. Kentworthy, that you still feel an unshaken belief in Garlett’s innocence?”

The detective allowed a moment to pass by before he answered, but at last his words came out clearly:

“I do believe in Mr. Garlett’s innocence. But to err is human, and I shall be able to tell you more as to what I really think and feel after I have made fresh investigations. I’d like, for instance, to have a talk with that Miss Cheale. You never know in a case of this sort who may give you a valuable clue. I take it she will be on our side?”

Dr. Maclean hesitated, a fact which was duly registered by Kentworthy.

“I don’t think Miss Cheale will be able to add much to our knowledge.”

“I suppose the fact has occurred to you, doctor, that this 149young lady—I mean Miss Cheale—had a certain interest in Mrs. Garlett’s death? She was left, I understand, a thousand pounds.”

“Yes, but she was receiving three hundred pounds a year, and all found,” was the quick answer. “Besides, I feel convinced that she knew nothing of that legacy. It took us all, even Mr. Garlett, entirely by surprise.”

He went to the door and called out: “Jean! Mr. Kentworthy is ready to see you.”

Pale, but absolutely composed, the girl came in. “Mr. Kentworthy would prefer to see you alone,” said Dr. Maclean.

“I should prefer that also, Uncle Jock.”

After her uncle had left the room there came a pathetic eagerness into her manner. She knew that James Kentworthy believed in her lover’s innocence, and she also knew, though she would have scarcely admitted it even to herself, that very few people shared that belief.

But though they discussed at length every detail of the story, he soon became aware that Jean had nothing to say that threw any light on the mystery.

“You suspect no one?” he asked at last, looking at her rather hard. “There is no secret thought lying at the back of your mind?”

“No,” she answered very gravely. “I suspect no one, and, what is more, I know Mr. Garlett does not either.”

Kentworthy gave her a long, measuring look. He was wondering whether she could be trusted with a secret. Finally he made up his mind that he would run the risk.

“Did Dr. Maclean tell you what first caused the Home Office to take action?” he asked.

“He doesn’t know!” she exclaimed. “Only the other day my aunt was saying she’d give anything to find out what had caused those first inquiries as to Mrs. Garlett’s death.”

“Your uncle is a man of his word,” said the detective briefly. “I myself told him what started the whole business, but I made him promise not to pass the knowledge on. However, I’m now going to tell you the secret, and I must ask you to make me the same promise that he made me.”

She looked at him with wide-open eyes, and then he said in a hesitating voice:

150“Mr. Garlett has some bitter enemy, some one who, as soon as the news of his forthcoming marriage to you had begun to leak out in the neighbourhood, formed, as I believe, an infamous plot to bring him to disgrace.”

“A bitter enemy?” faltered Jean.

“Yes, a bitter enemy, to my mind certainly a woman, who wrote the three anonymous letters which led indirectly to the exhumation of Mrs. Emily Garlett.”

As she stared at him, overwhelmed with horror and dismay, he laid before her on her uncle’s writing table the three sinister sheets of paper.

“By rights I ought not to have kept these facsimiles in my possession. But I made up my mind that it would be right for me to keep even that which does not belong to me—if it will help me to save an innocent man.”

Jean gazed down at the first impersonal note, that in which the writer said he felt it his duty to draw the attention of the Head Commissioner of Police to “certain mysterious circumstances surrounding the death of Mrs. Garlett.”

“This,” she said doubtfully, “was perhaps written by some one who really thought there should have been an inquest?”

Kentworthy shook his head.

“You are too kind, my dear young lady. Look at No. 2.”

“But surely this letter was not written by the same person who wrote the first one?” exclaimed Jean, as she gazed at the second, ill-written, comma-less letter.

Then, as she read it over, she grew deeply red. Indeed, she felt as if the words: “The doctor’s niece can tell you why poor Mrs. Garlett’s doctor made no fuss,” had been burnt, with a hot iron, for ever on the tablets of her memory.

“Now look at No. 3—that which purports to be written by the sender of the first letter.”

She read over the long sentence, and then a look of bewilderment and pain struggled together in her face.

“Well,” asked the detective gravely, “have you any suspicion at all as to who wrote these letters?”

She knitted her forehead and remained silent for quite a long time, and James Kentworthy’s hopes rose high.

But at last: “I have no suspicion,” said Jean Bower slowly.

“Your uncle thought that they might be the work of that Miss Prince, who lives in the Thatched Cottage.”

151“I’m sure not,” said Jean, shaking her head. “Miss Prince is a spiteful woman, and she has never liked Harry, but she’s not a fiend.”

James Kentworthy looked at her with increased respect.

“I agree,” he said, “it’s never any use trying to convince oneself of what, deep at the back of one’s mind, one knows is not the case. But I won’t conceal from you that I’m disappointed! Somehow I hoped you would be able to help me, Miss Bower, and now I feel as if we were up against a blank wall.”

She said nothing, for she felt terribly oppressed—the knowledge that there was some one in the world who intensely hated both Harry Garlett and herself filled her with a kind of unreasoning terror.

“I’m not giving up hope, mind you,” went on Kentworthy. “We’ve a long time before us yet, and after all”—he was now speaking as if to himself—“we’re lucky to have secured Sir Harold Anstey.”

Jean’s lip quivered. She felt as if, in spite of his brave words, he was beginning to believe that he was confronted with an unfathomable mystery.

“Sir Harold and I are old friends,” went on the detective with a queer smile. “Thanks to me, a murderer Sir Harold was bent on getting off was hung. So there’s no love lost between us! Still, he’s a tower of strength with a jury—makes them see black’s white, so to speak.”

“Do you think that will be necessary?” she asked in a trembling voice.

“I think Sir Harold will start some queer theory of his own—such as that the poor lady may have poisoned herself.”

“That won’t be the truth,” said Jean.

“And when you are in the witness-box it will be very pleasant for you, Miss Bower—very pleasant, I mean, that Sir Harold will be with you, and not against you.”

“Mr. Garlett means to go into the box,” said Jean quickly.

“I know he does,” said the other, “and I’m sorry for it. It’s an unfair thing that any man now standing on trial for his life has to go into the box or be considered guilty! Why, it’s a monstrous thing in a way. Those who changed the law never thought it would be like that.”

152“I don’t understand,” she exclaimed, bewildered. “Why shouldn’t he go into the box?”

“Because, Miss Bower, he’ll be up against people very much cleverer than himself, if you’ll forgive me for saying so—people, too, who’ll be keen and resourceful, while he’ll be nervous and dejected. Now take one thing”—he looked at her hard, hesitated in his own mind, then determined that he would go through with what he felt ought to be said—“Mr. Garlett will be asked when he first began to feel for you those—well—sentiments that led to his asking you to be his wife? If he is an absolutely honest man I expect he will feel compelled to answer that he was attached to you long before anybody else knew that he was. That will look pretty bad from our point of view. Motive, Miss Bower—that’s what judge, jury, everybody in a word, is always looking for in a murder mystery. And you would provide a very strong motive—if you take my meaning.”

He saw her face change. It was as if all the colour was ebbing out of it. He suddenly regretted that he had been so frank.

“Is there anything I can do to help?” she asked piteously.

He shook his head regretfully.

“I suppose it wouldn’t be any good my seeing Sir Harold Anstey?”

Mr. Kentworthy remained silent for a moment, and then he answered in a rather singular tone:

“I think it would be a good thing for you to see him, Miss Bower. But, mind you—it would be irregular—very irregular! Mr. Toogood wouldn’t lend himself to anything of that sort.”

“If you think it would help Mr. Garlett, I’d manage to see Sir Harold Anstey somehow,” she exclaimed, the colour coming back into her face.

“I expect you would. But——”

“But what?” she said eagerly.

“I shouldn’t like it to be known that I advised your doing such a thing. It isn’t my business to advise what isn’t proper,” he said irresolutely.

“You haven’t advised it,” she exclaimed. “The moment I heard that Sir Harold was going to defend Harry I made up my mind to see him.”

153“Between you and me,” went on the worthy man, “it has always seemed to me to be dashed stupid that the advocate who is going to defend a man accused of a serious crime isn’t allowed to see him! In this case it might make a real difference, for if Mr. Garlett convinced me of his innocence, who’d gone to see him feeling pretty sure he was guilty, then think of the effect seeing him might have on a man who wants to think him innocent?”

“Can’t I persuade Sir Harold to see Harry?”

The detective gave a short barklike laugh.

“Sir Harold won’t see Mr. Garlett till they’re both in court, and one of them in the dock!”

Jean covered her eyes with her hand, but that made her see all the more clearly the awful picture conjured up by Mr. Kentworthy’s words.

“Look here, Miss Bower. If you will keep your word you’ll never let Sir Harold know how you obtained them, I’ll give you these anonymous letters to show him. I’m sure the Prosecution don’t mean to produce those letters. ’Twould put people off writing to the police if they thought their letters would be put in among the exhibits.”

“Exhibits?” echoed Jean, “what are they?”

“Exhibits are the actual, concrete objects connected with the case,” explained Kentworthy. “If you show Sir Harold these letters he may demand that the originals be ‘put in,’ as they call it. That will add a useful touch of mystery—and he’ll make the most of it, never fear!”

“Then I’m to leave these facsimile letters with him?”

“Indeed you’re to do nothing of the kind! If we have the good luck to run across their writer we may be very glad of them.”

“How soon ought I to try to see Sir Harold?”

“As soon as I hear Sir Harold is back at work I’ll wire to you: ‘Have hopes of a clue.’ But look here, Miss Bower. If I were you I’d tell no one of what you mean to do, for it’s irregular—very irregular! If the case were reversed, if you were a gentleman and not a young lady, I’d never advise you to try to see Sir Harold. But I think he’ll see you.”

Sir Harold was what is known in common parlance as a ladies’ man. But somehow the detective felt it best to leave Jean Bower to discover that fact for herself.

154
CHAPTER XIV
“I’m frightened about Jean.”

Dr. Maclean looked across at his wife. “How d’you mean?” he asked irritably. “Explain yourself, woman.”

“I sent her upstairs to lie down after Mr. Kentworthy had gone away, and about tea-time Elsie went up to see if she was asleep. But she wasn’t in her room. We looked all over the house, but she’s slipped out without telling anybody.”

“Well? What of that? Why shouldn’t the girl want a breath of fresh air? It’s just what I should have done at her age if I’d felt as I’m afraid the poor wean is feeling now.”

“Listen to what she did do,” said Mrs. Maclean in a low voice. “Elsie felt uneasy—just as uneasy as I did. So she went off into the village. They said at the post office that Jean had gone by, walking very quickly, about a quarter of an hour before. Then Elsie—the woman’s no fool, Jock—somehow guessed what the child had done!”

“D’you mean she went to the Thatched House?”

Dr. Maclean could not keep the dismay out of his voice. He knew that the police were still in charge of Harry Garlett’s dwelling-place.

“She went to the churchyard. Elsie found her close to poor Mrs. Garlett’s grave. She was kneeling there, on the bare, wet ground, and when Elsie came up close behind her she heard her say: ‘Don’t be angry with Harry, Mrs. Garlett. He hardly knew I existed while you were alive. But I’ll give him up—I will, indeed, if you’ll help to save him?’ The poor girl screamed when Elsie spoke to her. But she got up off the cold earth, and came back with Elsie. She’s sitting in the dining room now, but she looks very strange, and when I spoke to her just now she didn’t seem to hear.”

The doctor looked alarmed. “She’s got it in her head that she may have said something to the man who took her 155statement that will injure Garlett. She let out as much to me yesterday. I did my best to reassure her, but I found it damned difficult to do so, beyond saying that if the man’s innocent nothing she said could affect the issue.”

“I wish I could think that,” said his wife significantly, “I used to believe that an innocent man was never found guilty, but I don’t know that I think so now, Jock.”

“Does that mean,” asked the doctor quickly, “that you now think Garlett is innocent?”

“I am more inclined to think him so than you are. For one thing, Mr. Kentworthy’s belief in him has impressed me very much.”

“Has Jean said anything to you about her talk with Kentworthy?”

“No,” said Mrs. Maclean; “in a way, she’s been quite mysterious about it, but I’m afraid she was terribly disappointed.”

“I suppose she’s sleeping badly?”

“She looked this morning as if she’d had no sleep at all.”

Dr. Maclean got up; he came over to where his wife was sitting and patted her hand.

“To-day I received a sample of a new preparation of bromide and valerian with just a dash of chloral. I’ll try Jean with that to-night, and if it gives her a good night I’ll wire to London for a bottle of the stuff to come down by train parcel to-morrow. We’ve got to keep her going these next few weeks.”

“I’ve such a horror of drugs,” said Mrs. Maclean in a low voice. “I thought you had, too, Jock?”

“So I have, but it’s quite an exceptional case. For the matter of that, I only wish I could send the poor child to sleep till the whole of this painful business is over. I’ve sometimes thought what a fine thing it will be when science is able to suspend a man’s thinking faculties for a much longer period than for just a few hours——”

“I don’t want to live in that time,” said Mrs. Maclean stubbornly.

“I daresay you don’t, but a good many people would be thankful to be able to take a dose of—shall we say ‘forgetfulness?’—through their worst time of sorrow, and, above all, of anxiety.”

156“Has any one spoken to you of the case to-day?” she asked.

“Every one has spoken to me of it! I was even stopped in the road three or four times, and not very far from our gate I had quite a talk with a newspaper man—in fact I wonder Jean and Elsie didn’t meet him. He admitted he’d been hanging about all the afternoon.”

“They did meet him—he said he came from the biggest of the London press agencies. But of course they hurried indoors and refused to have anything to say to him.”

“He almost persuaded me that it would be worth our while to let Jean give him an interview,” observed the doctor hesitatingly.

“I disagree,” she said emphatically.

“Well, the question won’t arise now, for I told the man right out she would give no statement to the press at all.”

“If only she would go away,” moaned Mrs. Maclean.

“I think she might—if you were to tell her that you simply can’t bear staying here in the circumstances, and that you will go with her,” said Dr. Maclean slowly.

As only answer his wife burst into sudden, sharp, short sobs.

“Why, what’s the matter?” he exclaimed.

“I can’t do it, Jock.” She was trying hard to regain her composure. “You mustn’t ask it of me! I don’t feel I can leave home just now. I know that my unhappiness is nothing to that poor child’s, but still, I am very unhappy.” The tears were running down her cheeks. “I suppose we’ve been very fortunate,” she sobbed, “more fortunate than I knew. Well, we’re paying for it now!”

“It’ll be all the same a hundred years hence,” he said lamely, “cheer up, woman!” And Mrs. Maclean wiped her eyes and did try to cheer up.

It is two o’clock in the morning, the darkest hour of the winter night, and Jean Bower is dreaming. In what she would describe as “a sort of a way” she knows she is dreaming, and yet, even so, she is filled with an awful sensation of foreboding and affright.

In this strange and terrific dream of hers, Bonnie Doon 157is transformed into a citadel. She is in an upper room, and, gazing fearfully out of the window, she sees a mob of men surging round the pretty, old-fashioned, creeper-covered house standing so defenceless close to the road leading from Terriford village to Grendon. The assaulters are trying to force their way inside the house. She can hear the roar of triumph when one of them thinks he has obtained a foothold on the trellis work, and the murmur of disappointment and exasperation when one of them falls back.

She knows with a sure and dreadful knowledge that they are all trying to get at her, and she begins running from room to room trying to hide herself. But this only means a new horror—for into whatever room she runs there is always a window, and against that window she sees pressed menacing, grimacing faces.

And yet, even so, one part of her drugged brain tells her that this fearful adventure is only a dream—a dream induced by what Elsie told her about the three reporters whose faces were pressed against the kitchen window on the morning after the arrest of Harry Garlett. Her uncle had warned her that what had happened that morning would probably occur again and again....

At last, with a sobbing sensation of relief, she awakes and sits up in bed. What was it woke her? The sound, which seemed infinitely far away, of a window opening and shutting?

Again she lies down, and soon she has gone back to that strange land of dreams that has always played such a part in her life. But this time it is to a happy dreamland, and to her weary, bemused brain the knowledge brings with it a vague comfort. Anything is better than real life just now.

A dream-match has been struck close to her face, and a dream-man’s voice—a low, pleasant, caressing voice—exclaims soothingly:

“Don’t be frightened, little girl; it’s only a friend who wants to help you and your lover.”

A friend? A real friend who wants to help her and Harry? How wonderful! Even though she knows it is only a dream-friend, the kind deep voice brings comfort, and a measure of reassurance, to her oppressed heart. So she answers in a low, sleepy voice:

158“How can you help us? I don’t think any one can help us.”

As she mutters the words the light flickers out, and she is again in darkness. But out of the darkness there again comes that drawling, caressing voice:

“We—you and I—have this in common, Miss Jean. You believe in Harry Garlett’s innocence, and I know he is innocent.”

She answers dreamily, “I know it, too. I more than believe, I know that Harry is innocent.”

And from her unseen friend there come again brave, comforting words:

“We must put our wits together, and think of something that will make other people believe him innocent.”

“I can’t think of anything,” she says wearily, “can you? Oh, do try, dream-friend!”

She finds it so delicious to be lulled by that deep, caressing voice, even though she knows it is only a dream-voice.

“Have you never thought that Mrs. Garlett might have taken the poison herself?”

She answers, as if hypnotized: “Do you think so?” and quickly the answer comes back out of the darkness: “Why not? There’s only one thing worth having in life—and that one thing the poor soul lacked.”

One thing worth having? What can he mean? Jean is losing hold of herself, she is beginning to feel extraordinarily drowsy.

“The one thing worth having in this queer life of ours is love,” whispers the tender, mocking voice. “Mrs. Garlett had no love in her life, and even she must have known that life is not worth living without love.”

Jean murmurs: “What brings happiness is to love, not to be loved.”

And then, as if the familiar words were being uttered infinitely far away, she hears—“Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings——”

Then the voice comes nearer, it is close to her ear.

“Before I go back, far, far away, to the land of dreams, I have a message for you, Miss Jean.”

“A message, dream-friend?”

“A message from Harry Garlett’s soul to yours. He asks 159you to remember that ‘stone walls do not a prison make, nor iron bars a cage.’ He says he feels happy—happy in spite of all that has happened—because he possesses your love.”

And then the voice becomes infinitely sad: “There is no love where I live—in Goblin Land—only an ugly imitation of love. Still, even an ugly imitation of the greatest thing in the world is better than no love at all,” and there is something so mournful, so hopeless in the voice that utters those words that Jean feels keenly distressed. Were she not so drowsy the tears would come into her eyes.

“Hobgoblins, strange and horrible shapes of pain and death, haunt my dwelling-place,” goes on her dream-friend. “True there is no unjust judge, no stupid, conceited set of jurymen, but as a terrible set-off to that relief there is no rapture—or none to speak of—in the land of dreams. You and Harry Garlett have the best of it, even now, in the waking world, Miss Jean. And now, dream happy dreams, poor child, happy, happy dreams....”

The next morning but one Elsie was bustling about her kitchen, but ever since she had seen those pallid faces pressed against the window-pane she had left the shutters closed till after breakfast.

Soon there came the sound of milk cans jingling against one another, so she hurried into the scullery and cautiously unlocked the back door.

The milkman looked so cheerful that Elsie felt irritated.

“You’re later than usual,” she said snappily.

“I stopped to ’ave a read of the paper. ’Tis rare exciting to-day.” He added with a chuckle: “I’m in it this morning.”

“You!” exclaimed Elsie. She thought he had gone mad.

“There’s my picture in it, as well as my name—just because I ’aves the honour of leaving the milk ’ere each morning,” he said grinning.

Then he waited for a second. Though they were old friends he was slightly afraid of the tall Scotswoman who now stood looking at him with an air of disgust and doubt on her strong features.

“You’re in it, too,” he said at last, enjoying with a somewhat 160fearful joy the look of wrath that flamed up into her face.

“Me in it?”

“You and me is on the back page. Right in the middle where they prints the big news there’s a piece as what they calls a statement about your young lady——”

And then he handed her the paper.

She opened it wide and saw that on the middle sheet, under a photograph of Bonnie Doon, ran the words in huge letters:

THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY
JEAN BOWER’S STATEMENT
BY AN OLD FRIEND
“Miss Jean’s not given any statement,” said Elsie fiercely. “It’s all a lie, from beginning to end.”

“Well, you just read what’s there.”

“I hope the doctor will have the law on this dratted paper. I never heard of such a thing. How dare they?” she cried indignantly.

But she was rapidly reading the short double-column, large-print article, and as she did so she was impressed in spite of herself.

Every man, woman and child in Terriford village will tell you that Jean Bower, the sweet-faced heroine of what promises to be one of the big murder mysteries of our time, is a simple, gentle-natured girl with an exceptionally kind and feeling heart for those in any sorrow or distress. That is why the hearts of all her neighbours, gentle and simple, go out to her in the terrible and overwhelming sorrow which has come to her.

While utterly refusing to be interviewed by any pressmen, I have had the privilege, as one of her oldest friends, to have a short talk with her on the subject of what has come to be called the Terriford Mystery.

Through me she is willing to let it be known that she is absolutely convinced of Harry Garlett’s innocence. Further, she is inclined to believe that Mrs. Garlett, a bedridden invalid, who was known to have attacks of depression at times, administered the poison to herself!

The very fact that Mrs. Garlett was so deeply attached to her husband would of itself provide a motive to some of those who were acquainted with the poor lady. Among those acquaintances, however, Miss Jean Bower was not, for it is a curious fact that she had never even seen Mrs. Garlett.

161Furthermore, her old friend can emphatically deny the cruel and stupid rumours that declare her to have been on friendly terms with Mr. Garlett before his wife’s death. Owing to a series of circumstances that will be made clear by the defence, Miss Bower, though actually in the employment of the Etna China Company, was only on the most distant terms with the company’s managing director.

As Elsie read on her first feeling of anger and disgust was insensibly transformed into one of satisfaction, though she frowned, or tried to frown, when, after a laudatory account of Bonnie Doon, of Dr. Maclean and of his wife, she came to the following paragraphs:

Last, and by no means least, in the group of people who compose this typical British household of worthy and high-minded folk, is Elsie MacTaggart, the cook.

Elsie is a clever, pugnacious Scotswoman, full of the mother wit and tender, homely wisdom that we all associate with the land which gave birth to J. M. Barrie. “It was a fair treat,” as one of those who was present told me, “to hear Elsie dealing with the swarm of reporters and press photographers that surrounded Bonnie Doon the day after Harry Garlett was arrested!”

Unlike the great majority of her brilliant fellow countrymen and countrywomen, she showed no favour, even to those of the press folk present who hailed from the other side of the Tweed. She held the fort, so to speak, with fine discrimination and courage, and it is largely thanks to her that no statement could be extracted even out of Dr. Maclean.

Elsie MacTaggart, in addition to her other gifts, is a splendid cook, and those who have the good fortune to be bidden as guests to Bonnie Doon all go home feeling utterly dissatisfied with their own porridge and griddle cakes.

“What a havering idiot the man seems to be!” said Elsie at last.

“Some there are as believe as what Mrs. Cole-Wright wrote that piece,” observed the milkman.

“Never!” exclaimed Elsie. “She’s far too proud a body to demean herself by writing for a newspaper. This is a man’s work—unless I’m much out of my reckoning.”

“Maybe it’s the Reverend Cole-Wright.”

“No, ’tisn’t him neither,” said Elsie decidedly.

Her quick mind was darting hither and thither. She felt genuinely puzzled, and then there came to her a sudden illumination.

“It’s that fat Kentworthy!” she exclaimed, remembering 162that Mr. Kentworthy had highly approved of the bountiful tea which had been spread out in his honour. Also, now that she came to think of it, he had said that he liked Scotch cakes owing to his mother having been a Scotswoman. Well, well, the world’s a small place!

Elsie took her old worn leather purse out of her pocket. “I’d like to keep this paper,” she observed. “Here’s a penny, milkman, for you to get yourself another one.”

“You can keep the paper and your penny, too,” said the man offended. “I never thought, Miss MacTaggart, good friends though we may be, that you’d take me for a Scotsman!”

Locking the scullery door, Elsie went back into her kitchen, and there she spread the newspaper out on the table, and once more read the article through.

Now Elsie never went into the village to do her daily shopping without hearing Mrs. Garlett’s mysterious death discussed from every point of view, but never once had any one even so much as hinted that the late mistress of the Thatched House had committed suicide.

Again and again she now read over the words: “She is inclined to believe that Mrs. Garlett, a bedridden invalid who was known to have attacks of depression at times, administered the poison to herself.”

This was, of course, the one solution that would make them all happy again!

So it was with a look of real happiness on her thin, intelligent face that she took the paper into the dining room just after the doctor and his wife had sat down to breakfast.

“There’s something just here,” she exclaimed, “that I doubt whether you’ll approve, doctor. But I’m thinking it will make you happy all the same.”

Without waiting for an answer, she went out of the room, and Mrs. Maclean jumped from her chair and came round to where her husband, an air of astonishment on his face, was staring with angry, disgusted eyes at the picture of Bonnie Doon. Then, together, they eagerly read the article which purported to contain a statement by Jean Bower.

“Whoever do you think wrote this?” asked Mrs. Maclean at last. “Of course there’s a lot in it that’s true, but I’d stake my life that Jean hasn’t talked about this terrible business to any human being. I know she has absolutely refused 163to discuss it with Miss Prince, though the woman’s been at her again and again about it.”

For a few moments Dr. Maclean remained silent. Half mechanically he was reading over and over again the phrases in the so-called statement that puzzled him the most.

Then at last he looked up.

“This is the work of a practised literary hand—maybe I ought to say of a practised literary hack!” he exclaimed.

“I’ll tell you who I think did it, or maybe had it done,” said Mrs. Maclean slowly. “I think ’twas that man Kentworthy or someone he employed to write it.”

The doctor struck his hand on the table.

“You’ve got it, woman!” he cried. “Kentworthy did his level best to force me to say that that poor creature, Emily Garlett, had administered the poison to herself. This is the red herring across the trail. Not a doubt of it!”

He sat back in his chair.

“The more I know of law and lawyers, the more I feel that what we call law and justice are queer, twisted things,” he said in a low voice. “Perhaps Kentworthy has done the best in the circumstances. At any rate, it’s not our job to let him down or blame him.”

His wife shook her head.

“To my mind no one is justified in putting words into Jean’s mouth which she never uttered, and never will utter,” she said firmly.

“You are one of those old-fashioned people who believe in telling the truth,” said the doctor dubiously. “I’d have said the same of myself a month ago. Of course, you and I know that that woman never committed suicide—the idea’s absurd! Still, if they can’t get any better notion, that’s what the defence will set out to prove—I can see that well enough. I fear me I shall be asked the question straight out, if only because of this foolish article.”

“And if you are asked the question straight out, what is it you intend to say in answer, Jock?”

They were both unheeding and uncaring of the good breakfast which was fast getting cold, and instinctively they had both lowered their voices for fear lest Jean, though they believed her to be safe in bed, might suddenly open the door on them.

164“Well, Jenny, if I’m on oath, what can I say, except that to the best of my belief the thought of suicide never crossed Mrs. Garlett’s mind?”

“Will you have to put it quite as strongly as that?” asked his wife.

“Well, I don’t say I shall put it quite as strongly as I’ve put it to you, but still it’s the truth! Mrs. Garlett loved life, for all she was such a poor, sickly thing. You must remember that she had never been a strong and healthy woman.”

And then Mrs. Maclean so far forgot herself as to say something which reduced her husband to silence.

She went back to her place behind the teapot, and from there, in a small, still voice, she said quietly:

“You did make one mistake, Jock. You hadn’t a doubt that the woman died a natural death, and you signed a certificate to that effect. Isn’t it just possible that you’ve made another mistake? Supposing, after all, Mrs. Garlett had got tired of her life and made up her mind to quit? Don’t you go and be too sure of anything, my dear. You were wrong once; you may be wrong again.”

He made no answer to that, and though she loved him well, and had no wish to hurt him, she would not have taken her words back. What she had said was true—in this strange world it is a mistake, sometimes a terrible mistake, to be too sure of anything.

After a while she spoke again:

“I wouldn’t let Jean know about this article, if we can prevent it, Jock. She’s so fearsomely truthful. She might think it her duty to write to the paper and say that she does not believe Mrs. Garlett killed herself! I did raise the point with her after Kentworthy came that first time, and she declared that Harry Garlett told her his wife was much too religious a woman ever to have thought of such a thing—apart from the fact that she always seemed perfectly happy and contented with her life.”

“I think you’re right. We’ll say nothing of it. What a blessing it is that we can trust Elsie to hold her tongue!”

And so it was that Dr. Maclean locked the paper away, and that Jean Bower was never shown the article described as containing her statement.

Yet the so-called statement was widely discussed, and 165both the Prosecution and the Defence took special note of it. Further, the circulation of the paper was very largely increased, at any rate in Terriford and Grendon, during the weeks which followed. Thus the enterprise the editor had shown in securing the article was justified, though one of the proprietors, when he discovered, as he took the trouble to do, that the author was a casual contributor and had been paid a special fee of fifty guineas, thought the sum excessive.

166
CHAPTER XV
Miss Prince got up very early on the morning Harry Garlett was to appear before the magistrates, to be either committed for trial, or sent out into the world a free man.

Though glad, in a sense, that her friend Agatha Cheale had been saved by illness from the painful ordeal of appearing against her late employer, she, Miss Prince, felt, from a selfish point of view, sorry. For it had been arranged, at Agatha Cheale’s own request, that the older woman should accompany her to the police court, and Miss Prince had a special reason for wishing to know what exact evidence as to the arsenic, the administration of which had undoubtedly killed Mrs. Garlett, would be tendered to-day.

As things had now fallen out, she would have to possess her soul in patience till the afternoon.

It may be asked why Miss Prince did not follow the example of innumerable women belonging to the neighbourhood, that is, go off to Grendon and, after a more or less long wait, fight her way into the police court? Had she been thirty years younger she might have done so, but being the manner of woman she was, the thought of doing so unladylike and bold a thing never even occurred to her. And yet, during the whole of the wakeful night which preceded her early rising, her mind was entirely occupied with the form the evidence against Harry Garlett was likely to assume.

As is the case with most clever, malicious gossips, no woman could on occasion keep her own counsel more rigidly than could Miss Prince. No doubt this was owing, in a measure, to the fact that for more than half her life she had been the trusted confidante of her father. In no profession is there so high a standard of loyalty to another’s personal secrets as in the medical profession, and what is true of the 167doctor is generally true also of the doctor’s wife and daughter.

So it was that Miss Prince had kept rigidly to herself a dreadful suspicion which since the arrest of Harry Garlett had hardened into certainty.

Lucy Warren, hearing her mistress stirring, had hurried down to cook the breakfast, and Miss Prince, leaving her cold bedroom, felt a certain warmth about the heart as there floated up her tiny staircase a pleasant aroma of frizzling bacon.

Worried and unhappy as she felt, uncertain, too, as to where her duty lay—a most unusual feeling with her—she yet told herself that she was indeed fortunate in her good, quiet, sensible young servant. Even as a child Lucy Warren had been a favourite of hers, and the girl seemed so superior to her class, so reserved, so proud, that for a moment Miss Prince asked herself whether she would not do well to confide in Lucy, for she longed to share her anxiety and uncertainty with some other human being. But the thought was no sooner there than she dismissed it, aware that if the moment came when she felt she must share her secret, it was to a lawyer that a certain fact, known to her alone, must be admitted.

But one thing she did this morning marked both to herself and to Lucy Warren the unusual nature of the day. She ordered her breakfast, for the first time in her life, to be brought to her upstairs sitting room. Perhaps because it was upstairs, she very seldom used this room, except when she asked a few friends in to supper and a game of cards. From her point of view, though she would not have admitted it, the upstairs sitting room of the Thatched Cottage was a cardroom and nothing else.

She sat down, feeling deadly cold, for though the fire was burning brightly the room was chilly, as a room in which no fire has been lit for some days is apt to be. But it was not the cold which made Miss Prince feel so shivery, and so miserably undecided in her mind. For the first time in her now long life she was confronted with a problem to which she could see no solution that would not bring disaster, even death, in its train.

Lucy Warren came up with her mistress’s breakfast tray. 168She drew up a small table and set it before her in silence, making no remark, as almost any other young woman would have done, as to Miss Prince’s surprising choice of a breakfast room, and she was just leaving the room when her mistress called out: “Lucy!”

Lucy turned round. “Yes, ma’am?” she said inquiringly.

Always Miss Prince insisted on being accorded brevet rank both by her own servants and the people of the village. She hated the term “Miss.”

“Come nearer, Lucy. I want to speak to you.”

And then, somewhat to Miss Prince’s astonishment, she saw that her words startled the girl. Lucy became painfully red, as she stood before her mistress twisting and untwisting a bit of apron in her hand, and looking very unlike her usual composed self.

“I want you to cast your mind back to last April and May—I mean, of course, when your friend Agnes Dean was my servant. You used to be in and out of my kitchen a good deal, I think.”

Lucy answered freely, eagerly: “Yes, ma’am, I used to come along most days.”

“Now I want to ask you a very serious question, Lucy, and I rely on you to keep the fact that I have asked it of you to yourself. Did she tell you, or were you aware of your own knowledge, that Mr. Garlett was ever in this house at a time when I was out of it?”

“Not that I know of, ma’am. The only person who used sometimes to come and wait for you while you was out was Miss Cheale.”

“Of course, I know that,” Miss Prince spoke with a touch of impatience. “What I want you to try to remember is whether Mr. Garlett was ever in this house alone for, say, a quarter of an hour? Especially, Lucy,” she hesitated, then asked the question firmly, “whether he was ever in this upper part of the house by himself? As you know, he is my landlord. On him depend all the outside repairs. It is possible, nay, even probable, he may have come upstairs once or twice on such business as that.”

“Mr. Garlett never bothered about that sort of thing himself, ma’am. He always sent the builder along. A nice fat lot of money Blackman has made out of that poor gentleman 169in the last ten years! Mr. Garlett never bothered, and Mrs. Garlett was too ill to bother.”

Miss Prince looked fixedly at the girl.

“Then you are not one of those,” she observed in a rather cold tone, “who believe that Mr. Garlett poisoned Mrs. Garlett?”

Lucy hesitated, and then she made a reply that surprised Miss Prince.

“I don’t care one way or the other,” she said sullenly. “Though it doesn’t seem to me that Mr. Garlett had any reason to do such a wicked thing. It wasn’t as if he’d known Miss Bower then—leastways he did know her, but he didn’t like her. I know that!”

“You know that, Lucy?”

“I do, ma’am. I heard Mr. Garlett say one day, when I was waiting at table, that he wished Mrs. Maclean hadn’t gone and asked him to take her niece on at the factory. He said it would be difficult to reprimand her—that was the word he used—if she did anything that he or old Mr. Dodson didn’t like. He said it was a mistake to mix up friendship and business.”

“Whom did he say that to?” asked Miss Prince eagerly. Here she was on her old familiar ground of gossip.

“He said it to the lawyer, Mr. Toogood,” answered Lucy.

“Was that just before his wife’s death?”

“Well, ’twas perhaps a fortnight before she died. I can’t say exactly. Miss Cheale had already gone upstairs, and Mr. Garlett had rung for more port wine, and it was as I came into the dining room that I heard him say that.”

“Dear me, that’s very interesting.”

“You won’t let on I’ve told you that, ma’am?” asked Lucy earnestly. “Mother’s fearful lest I be mixed up in it all. She was once called to an inquest and never forgot it. It made her ill for months afterward, that it did—she was so terrified. Those lawyers ’ud get anything out of you. They make you say black’s white—and white’s black.”

“I don’t think there’s the slightest reason to fear that you will be called as a witness,” said Miss Prince coldly, “and in any case, if you were called, it would be your duty to attend, Lucy. Surely you would think it a duty to speak up and tell the truth?”

170And then Lucy, emboldened by Miss Prince’s benignant mood, ventured a question.

“Will you be a witness, ma’am?”

“I? Certainly not! Why should I be?” Miss Prince looked disturbed—she even flushed a little. “Miss Cheale will be a witness for the Prosecution, for she was with poor Mrs. Garlett when she died.”

And then Lucy said in a singular tone:

“Miss Cheale will be sorry if Mr. Garlett is hanged. She was such a friend of his.”

“Not only a friend,” said Miss Prince quickly, “but a relation, too. Miss Cheale is a distant cousin of Mr. Garlett’s. I’ve always supposed that that was why Mrs. Garlett left her that legacy.”

Lucy turned away, and perhaps it was as well that Miss Prince did not see the look that came over her face.

“Lucy? One word more. Has your mother heard from Mr. Guy Cheale lately? Does she know where he is, and what he’s doing?”

Lucy did not turn round, as a properly trained servant ought to have done.

“Mother heard from Mr. Cheale? Not that I know of. Why should she?”

Then she slipped out of the room and went down the stairs at such a pace that her mistress concluded she must have heard some one knocking at the back door.

Miss Prince began eating her now cold egg and bacon. She felt sick and shivery, yet she forced herself to eat, and after a while the food and her good China tea made her feel a little better. But even so she was in a miserable state of uncertainty.

With all her odious peculiarities she had a strict, if a narrow, sense of duty, and she could not make up her mind as to what she ought to do with regard to a sinister fact known to herself alone.

Miss Prince, for her misfortune, knew of a place in Terriford where arsenic could be found. And deep in her heart she was quite certain it was from that store or cache of arsenic that had been stolen the dose of poison which had killed Emily Garlett.

That store or cache of arsenic was here, in her own house, 171close by where she was now considering the difficult problem of what it was her duty to do.

Sitting there, in front of the now bright fire, she could visualize with horrid clearness the fat glass-stoppered bottle with the red label on which was printed in black letters the word “Arsenic.”

The bottle—which contained a sufficient quantity of the deadly poison to have killed every one in the village—stood on the top shelf of her drug cupboard, in a tiny room next door, known all over the village as “Miss Prince’s medicine room.”

As residuary legatee to her father, everything that had belonged to him at his death had passed into her possession, and she had chosen to take with her to her new home the drugs that had been in his dispensary.

In a country medical practice every little counts. Thanks to Miss Prince, the poorer folk in Terriford had hardly ever had occasion to consult Dr. Maclean. He had spoken to her of the matter only once—years ago—soon after his arrival. She had said what had been far more true then than it was to-day—that the working folk were so miserably poor that it would be sheer cruelty to ask them to send for the doctor for every trifling ailment. Further, she had asserted that often she relieved him of work for which he could never expect any payment, and Dr. Maclean had admitted, somewhat reluctantly, the force of the argument.

But while the knowledge of that stoppered bottle on the top shelf of the drug cupboard which she generally, but not invariably, kept locked, made her feel acutely anxious, she tried to persuade herself that it could not be her duty to force herself into this, to her, horrible affair. Not only was the thought of appearing in the witness-box at a great trial terrible to one with Miss Prince’s old-fashioned feminine outlook on life, but she was well aware that she would certainly be severely censured, by both counsel and judge in the case, for keeping such poisons as arsenic and strychnine in her house.

She faced the grim certainty that she, and she alone, could supply the missing link in the chain of circumstantial evidence now tightening around Harry Garlett. But would that link be missed? Never having liked him, and having 172now no doubt as to his guilt, she equally had no doubt as to his fate. Was it essential that she, his wife’s oldest friend, should hound him to his death?

She asked herself with a sharp feeling of self-rebuke why she had been such a fool as to keep a poison which she never had any reason to use? But there it was, she had kept it.

Getting up at last, she took off a small bookshelf “The Student’s Handbook of Forensic Medicine and Public Health,” and turning to the entry “Metallic Irritants,” she quickly made herself mistress of what information was there.

She learned that white arsenic—that is the type of arsenic in her possession—was not only colourless and odourless, but almost devoid of taste, thus very easily administered in powdered sugar, and even she, with her wide knowledge of drugs, received a certain shock when she discovered that a pinch of arsenic holds no less than seventeen grains, two grains being a fatal dose.

Now Miss Prince, in common with almost every one in the neighbourhood, had severely blamed Dr. Maclean for his lack of suspicion, but, as she read the little black volume by which her father had set such store, she realized that the old doctor had not been so much to blame after all. For, whereas in many cases the symptoms of arsenical poisoning point to an irritant administered, all sorts of anomalies may and do occur. In fact the symptoms are frequently so misleading that death due to the action of arsenic has even been described as spontaneous internal inflammation!

Miss Prince put her book back on its shelf and went out on the landing. She listened intently for a few moments, and then, turning the handle of the door giving into her medicine room, she went through into the tiny bare chamber.

After having shut the door softly, she gazed at the substantial wooden cupboard in which she kept the drugs which were a survival of the days when she had been her father’s faithful assistant and dispenser.

The cupboard was locked now. But it had been often left open till a few days ago—owing to the trifling fact that something had gone wrong with the lock, and that it had become just a little tiresome to turn the key.

If only walls could speak! Miss Prince, gazing up at the grained wood, would have given years of her life to know if 173Harry Garlett had ever stood where she was standing now—but with the cupboard doors wide open before him.

At last, with an impatient movement, she took a step forward, and stood by the narrow window of her medicine room, and then, suddenly, she shrank back, and a deep frown gathered on her face.

Trudging quickly along in the wintry sunshine was James Kentworthy, the man who had, to use her own expression, bamboozled her. It was easy now to marvel at her stupidity in supposing for a moment that such an individual could have been connected, even very distantly, with her poor friend, Emily Garlett. But she had believed him, absolutely, and on the strength of it had asked him in to tea. Well she remembered the quiet, skilful way in which he had examined and cross-examined her concerning the inmates of the Thatched House.

James Kentworthy was on his way to Bonnie Doon, for it had been arranged that he and the doctor should drive together to Grendon in order to be present at the final inquiry before the magistrates.

The private inquiry agent felt, if possible, even more baffled than he had been at the end of his conversation with Jean Bower. He had learned everything there was to learn, or so he felt convinced, concerning the only people who had had access to Mrs. Garlett, and more and more it had become clear to him that the only human being with a paramount interest in her death was her husband, Harry Garlett. Twenty years of hard work in the Criminal Investigation Department had proved to him that where there is no motive there is no murder, and if this be true of an ordinary, sordid crime, how much more true when a secret poisoner is in question!

But Kentworthy was also aware of a fact which is often forgotten by those interested in murder mysteries—namely, that a motive which may seem utterly inadequate to one type of mind, to another may be overwhelmingly sufficient for almost any crime.

Again and again he had asked himself, in the last few days, what manner of woman was Agatha Cheale? Next to Harry Garlett she was the only human being who had benefited by Mrs. Garlett’s death. On the other hand, 174the young lady had been in the enjoyment of a very exceptional salary. For her apparently simple and easy services she had been paid at the rate of three hundred pounds a year. Further, Mr. Toogood had assured him that Mrs. Garlett, secretive as are so many people concerning their money affairs, had not even made the husband whom she dearly loved acquainted with the terms of her will.

All those men whose professions, be they lawyers, doctors, ministers of the gospel, whose way of life brings them closely in touch with human nature, soon become aware of how difficult it is to form any accurate view concerning the secret relations of a man and a woman. Mr. Kentworthy had come to the reluctant conclusion that long before his wife’s death Garlett had lived a double life. He was convinced of the truth of Lucy Warren’s statement as to the meetings in the wood, and the more convinced because the girl had made it unwillingly, indeed had been frightened into making it. Twice he had tried in the last three days to get in touch with her again, each time choosing a moment when Miss Prince was out. But Lucy Warren had defied him, and the second time he had seen her she had said with a shrewdness that surprised him:

“I am not bound to tell you anything now. It was different when you came from the police.”

Kentworthy was convinced that she had told the truth, and so he accepted it as a fact that Garlett had been in the habit of meeting a woman secretly at night. Further, he believed that the anonymous letters had been written by that unknown woman, and he hoped that her association with Garlett—of whatever nature it might prove to be—would provide a sufficiently strong motive for her to have committed secret murder.

With his mind full of these vague and uncertain half-suspicions, the detective came within sight of Bonnie Doon, and then he hastened his steps, for the doctor’s motor was already before the door waiting to start for the police court in Grendon where Harry Garlett’s fate was to be decided to-day so far as it was within the power of the local magistrates to decide it.

175
CHAPTER XVI
Early that same afternoon Miss Prince made her way to the rectory. She felt too anxious, too excited, too restless to stay quietly at home, and she knew that the rector would soon be returning with the news of what had happened.

She and the rector’s wife, Mrs. Cole-Wright, were on terms of armed neutrality rather than friendship, and that though they “ran the parish” between them. Mrs. Cole-Wright was the best-read woman in the neighbourhood. In happier circumstances she might have cut a certain figure in the world. As it was, her sarcastic tongue and reputation for “cleverness” caused her to be avoided by many of her neighbours.

She shared to the full the prevailing excitement concerning Harry Garlett, and so, for once, she was glad to see Miss Prince.

“The rector is not yet back,” she observed, “but you must wait and hear what he has to say. I suppose that unfortunate man has been committed for trial, though I don’t quite see what actual evidence they have against him.”

“How d’you mean?” exclaimed the other, surprised. “Surely you don’t doubt that poor Emily Garlett was poisoned?”

“Of course I don’t doubt that,” answered Mrs. Cole-Wright impatiently. “But I do ask myself how they will be able to bring the murder home to Harry Garlett, unless they can prove that he had arsenic in his possession, or that he bought arsenic for any purpose whatsoever, within a comparatively short time of his wife’s death.”

“I think it’s almost certain that they did find some arsenic in the Thatched House,” said Miss Prince. “But we shall soon know——”

176She did not look up as she spoke; she kept her eyes fixed on a worn spot in the rectory drawing-room carpet.

Even as she said the words there came the sound of the front door opening and shutting, and a moment later the rector came hurriedly into the room, almost as eager to tell his news as they were to hear it.

“Well, it’s gone as I suppose we all expected it to do,” he exclaimed. “Garlett has been committed for trial at the next assizes on the charge of having murdered his wife!”

“How did he take it?” asked his wife.

“Very oddly, to my thinking. The unhappy man addressed the magistrates. Think of that! Why, he himself was sitting on that very magistrate’s bench less than a month ago——”

“What did he say?” exclaimed the two ladies together.

“He only spoke for about three minutes—but it seemed an hour to me! He declared most solemnly that he was not guilty, and he made a kind of appeal—it made me go hot all over—asking how it was possible that any one who had ever known him could believe him guilty?”

And then Miss Prince looked into the rector’s kindly, troubled face.

“Did they find any arsenic at the Thatched House?” she asked in a low voice.

“Nothing was said about that,” answered the clergyman slowly. “If any arsenic was found they have not chosen to bring the fact forward to-day. Of course what told terribly against Garlett was Maclean’s evidence.”

“Had he anything new to say?”

“Well, I don’t know that he had, exactly. But there was quite a sensation in the court when he revealed that Mrs. Garlett had taken a plateful of strawberries and sugar from Harry Garlett’s own hand a few hours before the poor soul died in agony! One could tell that according to Maclean’s theory the arsenic was administered in the white powdered sugar which seems to have been thickly sprinkled over the strawberries.”

“My strawberries!” exclaimed Miss Prince, as if speaking to herself, “my strawberries—alas!”

They both turned on her quickly.

“Your strawberries, Miss Prince? What do you mean?”

177“Ever since I was a girl,” she answered, “I have grown a few forced strawberries each spring. I thought every one in Terriford knew that.”

There came a spot of colour into her sallow face. She had never presented the Cole-Wrights with a basket of her forced strawberries, and now she regretted the omission.

“Do you mean you grow them in pots in the house?” asked Mrs. Cole-Wright, a touch of sarcasm in her voice. She had no love of gardening—another peculiarity which tended to make her unpopular with her neighbours.

“I grow them there in two small barrels in which holes have been pierced,” answered Miss Prince quickly. “A French governess showed me how to do it when I was little more than a child, and I grow those tiny Alpine strawberries that the French call the ‘Four Seasons.’ On that fatal Saturday last May, hearing that poor Emily Garlett was feeling rather less well than usual, I took her up my first gathering, so to speak. Though the berries were rather white they were very sweet. To think that they should have helped to kill her!”

“And was it your sugar, too?” asked the rector abruptly.

“Good gracious, no—of course not! I took the strawberries to the Thatched House in a little covered basket which I left with Miss Cheale, and she brought me back the basket that same evening.”

“Did Mr. Garlett allude to the strawberries in his speech to-day?” inquired Mrs. Cole-Wright.

“I’m sorry to say he did. He denied absolutely that he had given his wife any strawberries. He said that he had never even seen them! But of course no one doubted that Maclean had told the truth, the more so that one could see that he gave his damning evidence with the greatest reluctance. I thought at one moment that the poor fellow was going to break down. It’s an awful thing for the Macleans. I feel truly sorry for them.”

“You mean because of Jean Bower?” observed his wife. Then she gave a curious little laugh. “Men are so sentimental, aren’t they, Miss Prince? The girl will get over it soon enough, Philip—never you fear! It’s lucky they weren’t already married. There I admit that Jean Bower and the Macleans have had a lucky escape. But as for the 178girl, no pity need be wasted over her. Why, she hardly knew Harry Garlett, when he came back four months ago!”

“I hope that’s true,” remarked Miss Prince in a singular tone.

“What d’you mean?” asked her hostess eagerly.

“I have my doubts as to the terms they were on before Harry went away.”

“Do you mean before his wife died?” asked the rector, in a horror-struck tone.

“My dear Philip,” exclaimed his wife. “Do you never hear any gossip?”

“I never heard any gossip as to the relations of these two people,” he said decidedly. Then, looking at his wife, “Did you?”

“I can’t remember exactly when I first heard a word said. But I do remember that I didn’t believe a word of it,” answered Mrs. Cole-Wright. “But of course I’ll change my mind if Miss Prince has any evidence that they were intimate——?” and she looked fixedly at her visitor.

“Intimate!” exclaimed the rector in a horrified tone.

“All I can say is,” Miss Prince spoke in a dogged tone, “that on the very morning I took those strawberries to the Thatched House, Harry Garlett and Miss Bower walked back together from Grendon across the fields. I saw them with my own eyes, just before I left the house.”

As the husband and wife leaned forward in their chairs and looked at her full of keen, if rather shamefaced, curiosity, she went on composedly:

“I’d already heard some talk about them even then. Jean Bower’s a very attractive girl, for all her quiet ways. Old Dodson was crazy about her.”

Mrs. Cole-Wright said musingly: “When one comes to think of it, Jean Bower was at the Etna China factory some time before Mrs. Garlett’s death. She first came here in the winter.”

“So she did—I’d forgotten that! Still, if Mrs. Maclean is to be believed,” observed the rector, “she and her husband were utterly taken by surprise over the engagement. The day she came to see me about the marriage—you remember how quiet they wanted it to be—she admitted that they had both thought the girl liked Tasker.”

179“Dr. Tasker has reason to be thankful to-day,” said Miss Prince slowly.

“Why?” asked husband and wife.

“Because,” she replied briskly, “could anything be more awful than to have one’s bride, even one’s fiancée, mixed up in such an affair?”

“D’you really think Jean Bower would have been mixed up in it—if she’d been engaged to Tasker?” asked the rector in a pained tone.

“One never can tell,” said Miss Prince sententiously, forgetting—as scandal-mongers are apt to forget—that in this life one cannot have it both ways.

She went on eagerly, “However, Dr. Tasker is out of it, and, next to Harry Garlett himself, the one most affected is Dr. Maclean. Mark my words—there’ll be an awful falling-off in his practice!”

She did not utter that prediction with any touch of regret in her voice, for she had never liked her father’s successor.

After a pause she added, “He showed himself grossly careless, if not worse, when signing poor Emily’s death certificate.”

“He was certainly taken in,” said Mrs. Cole-Wright acidly.

The rector exclaimed: “Yes, indeed! By the way, he made great play to-day with the fact that he was being called as a common, and not as an expert, or skilled, witness.”

“How very odd,” observed Mrs. Cole-Wright. “Surely a doctor is always an expert—or ought to be?”

“Well, no, not according to law,” said the rector. “According to him—and I could see that none of the magistrates dared to contradict him—he was only bound to state, as any other witness might have done, the facts that had fallen under his own observation. They tried hard to make him say what he thought himself as to Garlett’s guilt or innocence, but he refused, very properly, to give an opinion.”

“Of course it will be got out of him at the trial,” exclaimed his wife.

“Do you know whether Dr. Maclean is to appear for the prosecution or the defence?” asked Miss Prince.

“For the prosecution, surely?” cried Mrs. Cole-Wright quickly. “But the defence will cross-examine him, and I 180pity the poor man if, as I heard yesterday, Sir Harold Anstey has already been briefed by Mr. Toogood.”

“Maclean said one thing that struck me very much,” said the rector. “He reminded the magistrates that a medical witness should always remember that he is not retained for any particular person, but in the cause of justice alone. I think you will find that he will make a most excellent witness. He certainly managed to conceal what he really thought from me—I could form no opinion as to whether he believes Garlett innocent or guilty.”

“You’d have made it out fast enough if he thought the man innocent,” said his wife shrewdly.

“Of course he knows Harry Garlett to be guilty,” exclaimed Miss Prince in a hard voice. “I don’t see how any one can doubt it.”

“How well I remember,” went on the rector, “Dr. Maclean coming up that Sunday morning, just as I was going into church, to tell me of Mrs. Garlett’s death. He looked terribly tired, for he had been up most of the night. But still we had a little talk about it. I was very much shocked, for, if you remember”—he turned to his wife—“I had seen Mrs. Garlett the day before, and she had seemed to me rather brighter than usual.”

He waited a moment, then exclaimed: “By the way, I remember now that Maclean actually mentioned those strawberries as having caused the acute indigestion which resulted in her death!”

His wife looked at him apprehensively. “Be careful what you say, Philip. You don’t want to be called as a witness?”

“Of course I don’t. Miss Prince? May I rely upon you not to tell any one of this curious little piece of corroborative evidence?”

“What the rector said is not evidence,” said Mrs. Cole-Wright lightly.

Her husband looked at her puzzled.

“One can never be quite sure as to who may be called upon to give evidence,” observed Miss Prince. “But the one witness they are sure to call at the trial is Jean Bower.”

“What an awful ordeal it will be for the poor girl,” said Mr. Cole-Wright in a moved tone.

181“The person I shall feel sorry for,” broke in his wife, “is Miss Cheale. I respect that young woman. She was always so quiet, so dignified, and kept herself to herself. She will be a most important witness.”

“And she seems to have been the only person actually with Mrs. Garlett when the poor soul passed away,” chimed in the rector.

“I was surprised at the time,” observed Mrs. Cole-Wright, “that there was neither an inquest nor a post-mortem with a person so important in her own way as poor Mrs. Garlett.”

“And there’s another thing,” said the rector hesitatingly, “though perhaps I hardly ought to tell it to you?”

“Of course you must tell us, Philip. All we are saying here is absolutely private——”

She looked at Miss Prince, and Miss Prince nodded, gravely:

“Harry Garlett was exceedingly anxious that the burial should take place two days earlier than it did,” said the clergyman impressively. “This fact, to which I now attach a sinister significance, was the more ominous because, instead of raising the question himself, he got Miss Cheale to do so. Miss Cheale and that queer, sickly brother of hers came and asked me if the funeral could take place on the Thursday instead of on the Saturday. Miss Cheale said that Garlett was anxious to have the funeral as soon as possible. But that again”—he turned to Miss Prince—“is a thing I naturally do not wish made public. The wretched man will be condemned on direct, not circumstantial, evidence, unless I’m much mistaken.”

“I suppose he will,” said Miss Prince.

Then she got up to go. She had enjoyed every moment of her visit, save during the short discussion as to the forced Alpine strawberries.

Lucy Warren was moving about her little kitchen trying to make work for herself. She was miserable with the dull dogged misery bred of hope deferred. Since the night she had seen Guy Cheale disappear through the drawing room window of the Thatched House, she had only had one short interchange of words with him.

182Months had gone by since then, and yet to Lucy Warren the wounds inflicted on her pride as well as on her heart were still open wounds. She was of course excited and interested in the question of Mrs. Garlett’s death, but to her the one thing that mattered was the mystery of Guy Cheale’s disappearance out of her life.

This afternoon the man she had come to love was very present to her mind. She seemed to see his keen, mocking face rise up before her. It was as if his heavy-lidded gray eyes—eyes that could be at once so cruel and so tender, were following her about.

Her feelings toward Agatha Cheale had undergone no change—in fact, when that young lady had stayed at the Thatched Cottage—Lucy had quietly told Miss Prince that she would not meet her, and Miss Prince had allowed Lucy’s sister to take her place for the time. Often since then, poor Lucy had regretted that she had not forced herself to stay and face her enemy. She would, maybe, have learned something as to Guy Cheale and his condition; she might even have had the good fortune to discover his address.

As these thoughts were drifting through her mind, there came at the back door a curious, furtive, uncertain knock.

With a strange sense of foreboding at her heart, she went and unlatched the door, and for a moment she thought the slight woman whose face was swathed in a long motor veil a stranger.

“I want to see Miss Prince,” said the husky voice Lucy remembered only too well. Then came a surprise: “Why, it’s Lucy Warren! Tell me—do you know if Mr. Garlett was committed for trial this morning?”

Lucy stared at the unexpected visitor, remembering that Miss Cheale was supposed to be too ill to leave London.

“I don’t know what’s happened to Mr. Garlett. I’m expecting Miss Prince back every minute. She’ll have found out for sure,” said Lucy coldly. “Come in, do! You look perished with cold, miss.”

Agatha Cheale came through into the warm kitchen. She loosened her concealing veil, and Lucy saw that her face was thin and worn. She looked very ill, and though there seemed nothing in common between her and her big, fair brother, yet to-day Lucy did see a kind of family resemblance which 183made her heart beat faster, and impelled her to do a thing she would have thought herself incapable of doing even for Miss Prince. It was in a tone of kindly sympathy that she exclaimed:

“Sit you down, miss, and I’ll take off your boots and bring a pair of shoes for you to put on!”

Agatha Cheale sat down wearily.

“I’ll take off my boots myself,” she said, “but I shall be glad of the shoes, though I can’t stay long.”

“Mother’s fretted a deal about Mr. Cheale,” said Lucy nervously. “Is he quite well?”

A challenging look flashed between the two young women, and then Agatha Cheale said coldly:

“I have no idea where my brother is. The last time I saw him was about a month after he left here. He was then going abroad.”

Almost as if the words were dragged out of her, Miss Cheale added: “He asked me about the Thatched Farm—how you all were, and so on. But I told him I did not know.”

After Lucy had fetched Miss Prince’s warm bedroom slippers, she asked the visitor: “Won’t you come into the little sitting room? I’ve kept up a good fire there. Miss Prince will be back in a minute.”

But it seemed a very long time both to the young lady sitting in the parlour and to the maid sitting in the kitchen, before there came the familiar knock at the front door. Miss Prince would have thought it quite wrong, almost a “fast” thing to do, to let herself in with a latchkey.

As Lucy opened the door she whispered: “Miss Cheale is here, waiting to see you, ma’am.”

“Miss Cheale!”

Miss Prince could hardly believe her ears. She had supposed her friend to be ill in bed, in London.

As she came in to her sitting room, Agatha Cheale stood up, a look of agonized suspense on her face.

“Is Harry Garlett committed for trial?” she asked.

“Of course he is—surely you did not expect anything else?”

And then Miss Prince felt suddenly disturbed and angry. She disliked intensely anything that savoured of hysterical emotion, and here was Agatha Cheale clasping her hands 184together with a wild gesture, and exclaiming: “How terrible! For he is innocent—innocent!”

“You cannot possibly know whether he is innocent or guilty,” said Miss Prince coldly. “Sit down, my dear. We’ll have tea in a moment.”

“He is innocent,” cried the other passionately. “I know Harry Garlett far, far better than I have ever admitted—even to you!”

Miss Prince’s heart seemed to leap in her breast. Was she at last to be positively assured of something which no one but herself had ever suspected, with the one exception, maybe, of Dr. Maclean?

Agatha Cheale sat staring before her, a look of terrible suffering in her eyes.

The older woman at last ventured: “You mean, my dear, that there were love passages between you? I always suspected it.”

“No!” almost screamed Agatha Cheale, starting up from her chair. “There were no love passages between us. What love there was was on my side—my side alone.”

And then she broke into bitter sobs. “I’m a wicked woman, a wicked woman——”

“Nonsense, my dear! If there have been no love passages, you are not a wicked woman,” said practical Miss Prince.

She walked over to where her friend still stood, a dreadful look of rigid misery on her face.

“Sit down,” she said quietly, taking up the other’s hot, nerveless hand. “Sit down, Agatha. You’re in a high fever, I do believe.”

“I have been in bed on and off for nearly ten days. But I felt I must come down here and learn what had really happened to-day. Have you seen any one who was there?”

“Yes, I’ve seen the rector. What told against Harry most was Dr. Maclean’s evidence. But no arsenic has yet been traced to his possession.”

In spite of herself, as she said those last words Miss Prince’s voice altered slightly.

“Why should he be suspected then—more than any one else who was in the house at the time?”

Miss Prince thought this a very silly question.

“What is absolutely certain, Agatha, is that poor Emily 185died, poisoned with an unusually large quantity of arsenic.”

“I know that,” said Miss Cheale in a quieter tone. “And yet—I daresay you will think me very foolish—though I do know it’s true, somehow I can’t believe it. Once or twice I’ve wondered—you’ll think me raving mad”—her voice sank almost to a whisper as she fixed her burning, sunken eyes on Miss Prince’s face—“if the analyst, the man who made the examination, could have mixed up poor Mrs. Garlett’s remains with those of some one else?”

“My dear Agatha!” the older woman looked at her with concern, and then, choosing her words, she said: “You mustn’t allow your feelings of affection for Mr. Garlett to affect——”

“I know what you mean,” broke in Agatha Cheale. “But while my reason tells me Emily Garlett was poisoned, everything else tells me that it can’t be true.”

“I’ve often wondered,” said Miss Prince suddenly, “what first started the inquiry. After all, none of us had the slightest suspicion there was anything wrong, had we?”

Agatha Cheale turned herself about, and sitting down, gazed into the fire.

“Well,” she said at last, in a voice that had now become collected and steady, “though none of us suspected anything at the time, there may have been some outsider who thought it odd that there was no inquest.”

“I can tell you who that outsider was,” exclaimed Miss Prince. “Mrs. Cole-Wright thought it a most extraordinary thing that there was no inquest! I remember her saying so to me the very day of the funeral.”

“Perhaps she wrote to the police,” said Agatha Cheale in a hesitating voice.

“I’m sure she didn’t. She’s a cautious woman, and she’s always liked Harry Garlett. No! it’s far more likely that some one who saw Harry carrying on with Jean Bower in the factory wrote to the police.”

“I suppose they called the girl as a witness?” said Agatha Cheale. There was acrid bitterness in her voice.

“No,” said Miss Prince, “they didn’t call her, oddly enough. They seem to have decided to do without her. Dr. Maclean was most anxious she shouldn’t be called. He 186said she was ill, and, after all, he’s the medical attendant of every one of the magistrates who were there——”

“Does she still consider herself engaged to Mr. Garlett?”

“She certainly does. Though, as to that, I can tell you a very curious thing.”

Agatha Cheale turned round eagerly, her face full of intense, painful curiosity.

“Harry Garlett has absolutely refused to see Jean Bower—I mean since his arrest. Some people say it’s nearly broken her heart. She’s so pale and thin you’d hardly believe her to be the pretty girl of a few weeks ago.”

The other drew a long breath. “So he won’t see her? Then he can’t have really cared for her.”

She waited a moment, and then added in an odd tone, “He is a very cold man.”

Miss Prince was surprised, “I shouldn’t call him that——”

Agatha Cheale turned round and looked straight into the older woman’s face. “He is what foreigners call ‘A Jaseph,’” she exclaimed.

Miss Prince shrank back, almost as if she had been struck.

“My dear Agatha—what a horrid expression!”

“It’s a true expression,” answered Agatha Cheale. “We’ll never speak of this again, and I don’t want you to have a worse impression of me than you must. But I cared for Harry Garlett, and I did my utmost—my utmost—to make him care for me. I failed. Let’s leave it at that!”

“Did Emily suspect that you liked him?”

“Good God, no!”

And again Miss Prince shrank back a little. This was an Agatha Cheale she did not know—a violent, unrestrained human being, laying her soul bare as few human beings ever have the cruel courage to do.

“I hope you got poor Emily’s legacy all right?”

“Yes, I got it almost at once. It enabled me to send my brother abroad.”

“How is he?” asked Miss Prince.

“I don’t know, he never writes to me, unless he wants money,” she said bitterly. “I’ve only cared for two people in my life—my brother and Harry Garlett—and neither of them have cared for me.”

She got up. “I must be going back! The driver of the 187car I hired at Dill Junction had a friend in Grendon. I said he could go there for an hour. I was afraid he might go into the village, and cause gossip. I think I heard the car come up just now.”

“I wonder if I ought to let you go away?” said Miss Prince hesitatingly. “You don’t look fit to go back to London to-day, my dear.”

“I couldn’t stay here. If I did I should get into serious trouble for not having appeared at the Police Court to-day.”

She turned and put her arms around Miss Prince’s angular neck. “Good-bye, Mary. You’re a good friend,” she exclaimed. “Forget all I’ve said to-day!”

“I will,” said Miss Prince soberly, “indeed I will, Agatha. I don’t feel as if you are really yourself, my dear.”

“I’m not myself in a sense, and yet in another sense I’m quite myself, more myself than you’ve ever seen me be.”

The great tide of life flows on steadily, ruthlessly, whatever be the tragedies or comedies being enacted below the swift-moving waters. Dr. Maclean had an important consultation early that afternoon with a great London specialist. And though both his wife and his niece were aware that he could not be in to lunch, yet both of them shrank from learning the news as to whether Harry Garlett was a free man or had been committed for trial from any one but him.

After the clock had struck two, Jean constantly took the little gold watch, which she wore on an old-fashioned gold chain round her neck, out of her belt, and Mrs. Maclean felt that they had both come near the breaking point.

“Let’s put on our things and walk to meet your uncle,” she said at last. “You won’t mind our seeing people on the road who may stop and speak to us?”

“I don’t mind anything,” she answered listlessly, and soon they were walking quickly in the direction from where they knew Dr. Maclean was to come. As they hurried through the biting January wind a little colour came into Jean’s face and she began to look more herself.

“It’s foolish to feel as I do to-day,” she said at last. “I’m not really in suspense, for of course I know quite well that Harry has been committed for trial. Nothing excepting a miracle happening—I mean the guilty person coming forward—could 188have prevented it. And yet?—and yet, Aunt Jenny, I hope against hope!”

“So do I,” said Mrs. Maclean in a low voice.

At last they saw the familiar little car rolling along very much more quickly than it was apt to do, and as the doctor drove up to them a glance at his face was enough.

“Of course he’s committed for trial. Nothing new came out—one way or the other.”

Then in a voice which he tried to make colourless, he went on: “I’ve got a letter for you from Harry, child. I was to give it to you only if he was committed for trial. Would you like us two to drive on, leaving you to read it and walk home alone?”

She looked up into his kind, tired face—oh, so gratefully, and held out her hand for the envelope.

“I think I’ll go walking on, for a bit, by myself. Don’t be frightened if I don’t come in for an hour or so.”

She tried to smile, but failed.

Mrs. Maclean got into the car, and the husband and wife drove off together, their hearts heavy with pity and that most painful of sensations that nothing they could say or do could help the poor girl they both loved so dearly.

After a few moments Mrs. Maclean made a restless movement.

“Don’t look round,” said the doctor sharply. “I know what’s in the letter I’ve just given the poor lass. He’s not only offered to release her from their engagement, but he begs her strongly to allow it to come to an end. Whatever he may have done, there’s something very fine about the chap. Both Toogood and the governor of the prison told me that Jean is never out of his mind—and not selfishly in it, mark you.”

“She’ll never give him up,” said Mrs. Maclean woefully.

“Bide a wee, my dear. I think she’ll do anything he asks her to do; and though I haven’t seen the letter I know that he’s put it very strongly to her. He’s assured her—a splendid lie if ever there was one—that the breaking of their engagement will be to his benefit, I mean during the course of the trial.”

“If he’s said that, perhaps she’ll do it.”

“The governor had a little talk with me before the proceedings 189began. He’s so much impressed with Garlett’s way of taking the whole thing that he half believes him to be innocent. I wish I could believe it”—unconsciously he was slowing down—“it’s no good my pretending that I don’t feel very wretched, the more so that I know well enough that if he’s hung it will be my testimony that will hang him.”

“Were you asked anything about Jean?” asked his wife in a low voice.

“Of course I was! And of course I had to admit that she’d been at the factory fully five weeks before Emily Garlett’s death. Also that they’d corresponded while he was away.”

“Jock! You never said that? Why, it was only the most formal business correspondence,” exclaimed Mrs. Maclean dismayed.

“They particularly questioned me about it, and though I tried to make the truth as clear as I could, I don’t think they believed me. Then I had to admit that the moment he came back he and she were always together. Garlett’s head foreman was called. I felt sorry for the poor chap—he is obviously attached to Jean, but he had to confess that the factory was humming with talk about them long before they became engaged. That stupid, daft old Sir William Harding asked: ‘You mean before Mrs. Garlett’s death?’ and the foreman was so bewildered that he actually answered: ‘I don’t seem to remember exactly when the talk about them did begin.’”

“And will it all be put in the papers?”

“Of course it will.”

190
CHAPTER XVII
Jean walked on, Harry Garlett’s letter, still unopened, in her hand, till she came to a little wood which she knew would be almost certainly deserted.

Once in the now leafless wilderness, she began walking slowly, her feet sinking into the sodden, fallen leaves, longing and yet dreading to know what Harry had written to her.

At last she slowly opened the square, official-looking envelope. Written across the top were the words: “Read and passed by J.C. Brackbury, Governor of H.M. Prison, Grendon.”

She was used to that sentence, but somehow to-day the pain and shame that such a letter as she supposed she was going to read, an intimate love-letter, should have been seen by any other eyes than her own, brought a new anguish.

She unfolded the big, plain sheet of notepaper, and at once she saw that there was no beginning or end to the letter. The fact that this was so gave her a quick, frightened feeling of foreboding.

If, as Toogood is obviously convinced will be the case, I am committed for trial, then, Jean, I want you to do something for me.

You’ve never failed me, and I trust you to see this thing as I see it myself. I want you, my dear, to release me. By that I mean that it is my wish our engagement should be at an end. I know you believe I’m an innocent man; but I’ve gone through hell since I was arrested, knowing that all unwittingly I have brought not only grief, but unutterable shame, on you and on those kind, good friends of mine, Dr. and Mrs. Maclean. I am told that nothing done now can prevent your being called as a witness at my trial, but I’m convinced that if you appear as a simple witness, and not as a woman engaged to me, it will be infinitely better not only for you, but for me also. This is why I ask you most solemnly to allow our engagement to come to an end, and to let the fact be widely advertised. As Toogood has reminded me more than once, we were, after all, only engaged for a very short time. But may I say, Jean, in this, 191my last, letter to you, for I do not intend to write again, and I beg you will not do so, that not only during the last few weeks but ever since I came home, you have made me as happy as any woman ever made any man, though in saying so I’m showing myself to be what every man is—selfish. Yet I like to believe that you will be glad to know that the happy days we spent together before I knew I loved you, the happy days we have shared since we knew we loved one another, have made up, to me at least, for everything that has come to pass. The thankfulness and wonder that one so unworthy as myself should have been blessed with your love will remain with me to the very end, and, I firmly believe, beyond.

I know you well enough to feel quite sure that you will not be hurt, still less surprised, to receive none of those last words and messages which only satisfy the morbid, horrible curiosity of a callous, cruel world. And so good-bye, my own, my only, love.

Jean Bower put the letter back in its envelope and thrust it in her bosom. She walked through the wood on to the now deserted stretch of downland that had been turned into a golf course by the enterprising municipality of Grendon.

Beyond the course there were a few pretty houses which now, in the deepening twilight, were being lighted up, and all at once Jean, in the midst of her agonized and bewildered questionings, remembered that in one of these houses lived Mr. and Mrs. Toogood and their only daughter. She remembered having gone there last August with her aunt to call on Mrs. Toogood.

She quickened her steps, and striking across the links, soon reached Mr. Toogood’s house.

In answer to her ring, a maid opened the door.

“Is Mr. Toogood back yet from his office? Could I see him?” asked Jean. “I won’t keep him five minutes, but it’s very urgent!”

“The master never sees any one on business out of office hours.”

Then, suddenly, the young woman realized who the visitor was, and a thrill of joyful excitement ran through her.

“Why, it’s Miss Bower, isn’t it? I’m sure Mr. Toogood will see you, miss.”

She led the way to a comfortable-looking library. A big fire was burning, and gratefully Jean sank into an easy chair.

Burning with curiosity and excitement, the girl hurried off 192to the dining room, where her master, while enjoying his tea, had been telling his wife and daughter every detail of Harry Garlett’s appearance before the magistrates and his committal for trial.

The maid was not lacking in a certain dramatic instinct, so when she came into the dining room she shut the door and said demurely:

“A young lady to see you, sir.”

Mr. Toogood looked up sharply. “No one on business, I hope?”

“It’s Miss Jean Bower,” announced the girl in a hissing whisper. “She do look miserable! I thought you’d see her, sir. She only wants to see you for five minutes, and says it’s very urgent.”

“Jean Bower!” exclaimed Mrs. Toogood. “And all by herself? You’re sure the doctor’s not with her?”

“Of course I’m sure, ma’am.”

And then Miss Toogood broke in: “I wonder what she’s come to say! I wonder whether she poisoned Mrs. Garlett, and whether she’s come to confess it to Father? Jimmy Danetree says that they ought to have called her as a witness this morning——”

“I forbid you to discuss Harry Garlett’s affair with young men,” interposed her father sharply.

He was on his way to the door, and though he too felt excited, he thought he knew what Jean Bower had come to tell him. Indeed he was sure that she had come to say that her engagement was at an end, and to ask him to make that fact known as widely as possible.

He walked into his study and held out his hand.

“Well, Miss Bower? I’m glad that you’ve come here to-night, instead of to my office to-morrow morning. Now that’s the very first time I’ve ever said that to any client of mine—and I feel quite sure I shall never say it again! Sit down, my dear young lady; I think I know the business that has brought you,” and his voice became very kindly.

“I don’t think you can know why I have come,” she said in a low voice.

“I think I do, for I had a talk with Mr. Garlett just before we went into the police court this morning. He told me he’d written you a letter which he was going to ask your 193uncle to deliver in case he was committed for trial. He did not show me the letter, but he told me what was in it.”

“I’ve come to ask you a very important question,” said Jean in a firm tone. She fixed her eyes on the shrewd face of the man standing before her.

“I ask you—and I want you to answer as if you were on oath, Mr. Toogood—will it do Harry good, or will it do him harm, if I break my engagement now?”

The lawyer felt annoyed, as well as very much taken aback. For one thing, he could not tell by her manner whether she wished his answer to be “yes” or “no.” So he answered her evasively:

“I know that Mr. Garlett strongly wishes the engagement to be broken off, Miss Bower. He spoke very frankly to me this morning, and he said he hoped with all his heart that you would do as he wished.”

“I realize all that,” she answered, with what was for her a curious and most unusual touch of irritation in her voice. “But I am not thinking of what he wishes me to do. What I want you to tell me is what will be best for him.”

And then suddenly she saw into Mr. Toogood’s mind.

“Surely,” she exclaimed, “you don’t think that I wish to break our engagement?”

With a pitiful little smile she added slowly: “To do that would break my heart, but I will, if you tell me that’s it’s honestly the best thing for Harry.”

He was so touched, so surprised at her words, that he felt he would like to take her in his arms and hug her.

What a splendid girl she was, and that even if she had allowed her employer, the husband of poor ailing Emily Garlett, to make love to her in his wife’s lifetime! She deserved to know the truth—the real truth.

“About that,” he said decidedly, “I can set your mind at rest. Though I should not like to be quoted as having said it, I haven’t a doubt that, in as far as public opinion plays any part in a great law case, the fact that you have remained faithful to Mr. Garlett can do him nothing but good.”

Jean sighed convulsively, and tears of relief began running down her face.

“We take our stand on Garlett’s absolute innocence,” continued 194the lawyer. “We wish to prove that he hardly realized your existence till some months after his wife’s death. That is the point on which you will have to try and convince judge, jury, and the very clever gentleman who will lead the Prosecution for the Crown. Now it is obvious to me that if you set out to do that as the woman who loves the prisoner in the dock, and absolutely believes in his innocence, that fact will give your words far more weight than if you come into court admitting that you have broken off your engagement.”

“Then why,” she whispered, “did he write me this letter? In spite of the loving things he said in it toward the end, I felt a sort of dreadful doubt, as if he no longer cared for me——”

“No longer cared for you?” exclaimed Mr. Toogood, wiping his spectacles. “Why, my dear young lady, it’s entirely for your sake that he wrote that letter. Didn’t you understand that? He won’t be allowed to see any of the newspapers after to-day, but up to to-day the Governor stretched a point. But it was no kindness, for some of the things the papers printed made him feel simply frantic. He was awfully upset at some article which said that you thought his wife had committed suicide. He wanted to have it contradicted!”

“I never saw any statement of that sort,” said Jean astonished. “I can hardly believe they can have dared to say such a thing. Of course I feel sure that Mrs. Garlett did not commit suicide.”

“Well, I wouldn’t go so far as to say that. Quite frequently it happens that a man takes his own life when every one round him would have sworn him utterly incapable of doing such a thing. If that is often true of a man, it is truer of a woman, for your sex is far more sensitive than mine, Miss Bower.”

“May I write an answer to Harry here?” said Jean.

He put a sheet of paper before her on his writing table, and taking up a pencil she wrote quickly:

I cannot do what you wish. I would have done so if not doing it would have done you harm. But I have found, thank God, that to break our engagement would do you harm rather than good.

195“And now,” observed Mr. Toogood, “I’ll just put my boots on again, and see you home.”

“Indeed, you’ll do nothing of the kind!” exclaimed Jean, and this time she really smiled. “I’m not a bit afraid. Besides, it isn’t really dark.”

She took his hand and squeezed it.

“You’ve never made anybody happier than you’ve made me to-day,” she said.

When Jean Bower slipped quietly back into Bonnie Doon, she amazed them all—those three kind folk who felt so unhappy and anxious about her, her uncle, her aunt, and Elsie—by being bright, cheerful, and full of courage and hope.

After a few minutes she went up to her bedroom. The writing table there was one of the few things she had brought from her old home. She went over it, and taking up an envelope, slipped Harry Garlett’s letter inside it. Then she wrote outside: “In case of my death I wish this envelope to be put in my coffin, over my heart”—and then she placed it in a drawer where she knew it would be found at once, should she die while still an inmate of the house where she had known such intense joy and such bitter sorrow.

After the first burst of excitement following the day of Harry Garlett’s appearance before the magistrates and his being committed for trial, all mention of the Terriford Mystery dropped gradually out of the newspapers; for weeks, sometimes even months, elapse between the committal of a man charged with murder and the actual opening of the legal drama which is to decide whether he is to enjoy life and freedom, or suffer a hideous and shameful death.

But though from the point of view of the public the case temporarily disappeared, there were still innumerable men and women all over England who seemed to find it impossible to banish the story from their minds. Many of the people with whom Jean had drifted into acquaintance during her life, and especially during the course of her war work, wrote to her with either strong interest or sympathy. But she received other letters of a very different character, and terrible letters some of them were, so venomous and cruel in their wording that they seemed as if inspired by personal hatred. A typical example ran as follows:

196Wicked Woman,
My husband’s love has been taken away from me by his typist, so I know exactly what poor Mrs. Garlett must have felt during that time when you were insidiously worming your way into the heart of your employer. Your conduct was the more horrible because, as is the case with my husband, that brute, Garlett, owed everything to his wife. I am eagerly looking forward to the day when you will stand in the witness box and all your sins be brought to light, also to the day when he will be hung.

Your evil wisher,
A Deserted Wife.
Of the letters written to her by people known to her there was only one that seemed to bring a touch of comfort to her sore heart.

It came from a girl, Rachel North by name, with whom she had worked for eight months in a war hospital. They had drifted into something very like close friendship during that time, but, as so often happens in life, though they had each made an effort to keep up their friendship by correspondence, the letters had become fewer and fewer on either side, and had now ceased for nearly a year. Thus Jean was the more touched when she received the following letter from her friend:

January 14th.
My dear Jean,
This is only to tell you that I feel deeply grieved for you and that you are a great deal in my thoughts. I know so well what you must be going through, and I will tell you now what I have never told you yet. My father, to whom I was devoted, was falsely accused of having embezzled a considerable sum of money. Though he was only technically guilty, for it was his partner who had embezzled the money, it was thought that my father had shown carelessness. Accordingly, though the other man got four years, my father received six months’ imprisonment. His death occurred two months after he had left prison.

I hope, my dear, that this man whom you love and who seems to be a splendid fellow, will get through his awful ordeal. Don’t trouble to answer this letter, but remember that if at any time you want to spend a night in London I can take you in. I am now cashier in a big boot store. The work is hard and the pay is poor, but I have had the great luck to be lent a small flat of three rooms for six months.

Your old friend who never forgets what a difference you made to her life during that dreary time in that convalescent hospital,

Rachel North.
197This was the only letter that Jean had cared to keep, and after answering it she had put it carefully away. It had comforted her, if only because it had been written by some one who had gone through in a smaller measure the anxiety, the anguish, and the suspense she was going through now.

Though the world at large had suspended its interest in the Terriford Mystery, that was not the case in this neighbourhood. There the excitement was kept alive by all sorts of happenings. The chief of these was the occasional appearance of James Kentworthy, and his eager attempts to get hold of any shred of evidence that would help his client. But in spite of his efforts he found no one who could throw even a glimmer of light on the apparently unsolvable problem of Emily Garlett’s death. The one weak link in the evidence against Harry Garlett, from the point of view of the prosecution, continued to be that up to the present no arsenic had been traced in any form to his possession. Inquiries were still being made all over England, and especially where Garlett had been either playing cricket or acting as a glorified commercial traveller to the Etna China factory. But so far these inquiries had yielded nothing.

Mr. Kentworthy had built great hopes on an interview with Agatha Cheale; but though on two occasions he had managed to force himself into her presence, she had, while coldly civil, replied to his questions: “I have been subpœnaed by the prosecution, and I understand that it would be quite out of order to give you any information. Besides, I could only tell you exactly what I told them.”

With Miss Prince he had again become on surprisingly friendly terms. They often discussed the case, and to him she always professed she kept an open mind. Yet Mr. Kentworthy felt sure that she knew something not to Harry Garlett’s credit. Once or twice he had thought her on the point of confiding to him what this was. But at the last moment she always quickly drew back, and made up her mind to be silent.

But if on friendly terms with Miss Prince, the inquiry agent was not on friendly terms with Lucy Warren. Again and again he tried to make the girl amplify her former statement to him. But all she would say now was: “I’m very sorry 198I said anything to you about it! Maybe it was not Mr. Garlett at all that was in the wood. It’s easy enough to make a mistake at night.”

She looked unhappy, scornful, and embittered with life, and one day he casually received a hint as to why that was so, from the village postmistress:

“There be some as says Miss Cheale’s brother, the gentleman who was Mrs. Warren’s lodger at the Thatched Farm, made up to Lucy. If that’s so, he’s gone and left her high and dry! Mind you, I don’t say that it’s true, but there be some as says so.”

He decided that there must be something in it. The girl looked as if she had been crossed in love.

At last it seemed as if Mr. Kentworthy had left the village for good. He had done everything that could be done there in the way of inquiry and suggestion, and he made up his mind to investigate the whole case from the angle of Harry Garlett’s life as a popular cricketer, welcome in many a great country house, and indeed everywhere where the national game has its experts and devotees.

But he had been gone only some ten days when there arrived for Jean Bower the following letter:

Dear Miss Bower,
I promised to let you know when Sir Harold Anstey would be back in town. I learn that he arrived home from the south of France yesterday. He is going away somewhere for the week-end, but he will be in his chambers in King’s Bench Walk from Tuesday onward.

I have no doubt that among your uncle’s more important patients there must be someone acquainted with Sir Harold who would be willing to give you a note of introduction to him. It might, however, be better to call on him and just take your chance.

I wish I had some good news for you. I am going on prosecuting my inquiries in a somewhat new field. In such a case as this, one never knows when one may obtain a clue.

Yours very truly,
James Kentworthy.
P. S. What you have to do with regard to Sir Harold Anstey is to convince him, as fully as you have convinced me, of the truth of your and Mr. Garlett’s assertion that you were scarcely acquainted at the time of his wife’s death, and that you did not become really friends till close on five months later. Do not forget to take with you the facsimiles of—you know what.

199Jean made up her mind at once that she would act on Kentworthy’s second thoughts. She decided, therefore, to go by herself to London, and, without giving him any notice, call at the famous barrister’s chambers on the chance of seeing him.

So the two people, whose anxious loving scrutiny of her day by day was sometimes more than she could bear, were disturbed and surprised when she suddenly observed:

“I want to go to London next Monday by myself. I’ve got a friend who will put me up for the night. I don’t want to tell you why I’m going, so please don’t ask me. But you will be glad to know that it is something I’m doing with the full approval of Mr. Kentworthy.” And then suddenly she grew very red. “I ought not to have said that,” she exclaimed in a distressed tone. “Will you try and forget it, and never, never tell any one?”

She looked from one to the other.

“Very well, my dear. But be careful. Mr. Toogood told me the other day that he had a great horror of anything like amateur”—the doctor hesitated a moment and then said, “spying.”

“I’m not going to spy,” said Jean, and she looked hurt.

“Well, well, my dear, forgive me for saying that! But you know what I mean? I don’t want you mixed up with any of Kentworthy’s dirty, if necessary, work——”

“Not if it helped Harry, Uncle Jock?”

“Not even if it helped Garlett, my dear.”

She turned away, and he knew that she would stick at nothing that would help the man she loved.

200
CHAPTER XVIII
Sir Harold Anstey came bustling into his pleasant chambers. He had only just come back from a long week-end, there was a bright fire burning in the attractive, wasteful, eighteenth-century grate, and the famous Old Bailey barrister felt not only fresh and keen, but on the happiest terms with himself and the world.

The great advocate was a big, florid, good-looking man, and so popular a bachelor that it was no wonder he had never made up his mind to become true to one lady.

Like most successful men, he attached great importance to the Press of his country, and he paid considerable court to those newspaper men with whom he came in contact. So of the pile of letters, opened and unopened, on his writing-table, Sir Harold first turned to a bulky envelope from his press-cutting agency.

The envelope contained a page cut from a popular picture paper, and across the top of the sheet ran: “The Terriford Mystery: Exclusive Photographs.”

Sir Harold smiled when he saw that the pictures were grouped round his own comely, bewigged visage. He noted that a delightful-looking country house was flanked by two portraits, the one being that of a pleasant-faced man in a cricketing cap, while the other was a charming-looking girl in V. A. D. uniform. In somewhat painful contrast below, was a large photograph, evidently taken a great many years ago, of a plain-looking woman in an old-fashioned wedding dress.

The barrister had mastered enough of the story to realize that the handsome cricketer was Harry Garlett, the man about to be tried for his life, and the sweet-faced young nurse Jean Bower, the girl to whom Garlett was now engaged, and who was supposed to have provided the motive for his having poisoned his unattractive-looking wife.

201As for the central portrait—the counterfeit presentment of himself—the caption which declared him to be “the most famous criminal lawyer of our day” gave Sir Harold pleasure, though it no longer bore the delicious thrill of novelty.

As he laid the sheet down on his writing table, the door opened and his clerk came in: “A young lady to see you, Sir Harold. She says she would rather not give her name.”

The great advocate looked sharply at his faithful henchman.

“I suppose you told her that I only see people by appointment?”

“I did tell her that, Sir Harold, but she said she did hope you would break your rule this time.”

“A nice young lady—a pretty young lady, Fulford?” asked Sir Harold.

He was fiddling about the papers which were on his table, and he did not look at his clerk as he put the question.

“Well, yes, Sir Harold, a very pretty young lady, quite young, too, if you’ll excuse my mentioning it.”

“All right. Show her in.”

While awaiting his visitor he idly opened a letter marked “Urgent and confidential” which lay on the top of the pile of envelopes.

It contained the following words:

It is because there are villains like you in the world ready to defend any rascal, however guilty, that men murder women, trusting to you to get them off.

Another tribute to his marvellous gift of advocacy! He read the ill-written sentence again, and it was with a broad smile that he greeted the very charming-looking girl who advanced nervously into the big, comfortably furnished room.

“Sit down,” he said with a kindly smile; and timidly his visitor accepted his invitation.

“I hope you will not mind telling me your name? Remember, my dear young lady, that wise people tell everything to their doctor and their lawyer!”

“My name,” she said quietly, “is Jean Bower, and I am engaged to be married to Mr. Henry Garlett.”

202As she uttered these words, there was no trace of a smile on her face, and it was then—for perhaps his knowledge of human nature had not gone as far as he thought it had—that Sir Harold Anstey realized for the first time that his visitor looked unutterably sad. Had she not been so young, and, yes, so attractive, he would have seen at once that she was spent with anxiety and suffering.

It must be admitted, though the fact did not redound to his credit, that Sir Harold’s manner underwent a quick and subtle change. It became, in place of deferential, familiar.

“Although your coming to see me like this is not at all in order, Miss Bower, I shall not be sorry to have a little talk with you!” he exclaimed, moving his chair just a little forward.

As he did this, Jean Bower, unaware that she was doing it, moved her chair just a little back.

“And so,” he went on, in a jocular tone, “you are the pretty young lady who has brought all this trouble about?”

Poor Jean! She felt as if this man, whom she had thought of as a friend, had struck her straight between the eyes. She made no answer to the half-question, and only gazed at him affrightedly.

“You are by profession a nurse, are you not?” he asked abruptly. He felt annoyed that she had not “played up.”

“No, I am not a nurse,” she spoke in a very low tone.

“But I have seen a picture of you, a very delightful picture, it is, too!—in a nurse’s dress.”

Jean Bower looked bewildered; then a painful flush came over her face. She also, for her misfortune, had seen the page now lying on Sir Harold’s table.

“The papers have published a head of me taken out of a group of V. A. D.’s,” she said quickly. “I acted as secretary for a while at a war hospital.”

“That’s why you were in France at the hospital to which Harry Garlett was taken when wounded in 1917.”

He thought he was on the right track at last.

“No,” she said again, “I was never in France, I was in a Manchester hospital in the later part of the war. I became secretary to the Etna China Company last April, and as I have not resigned my post, I am that now.”

She spoke with a certain simple directness.

203“Then you were secretary to Mr. Garlett’s company, and you also took care of his wife?” said the famous advocate, again with a curious, not very pleasant, smile on his face.

“You are confusing me with Miss Cheale, who was Mrs. Garlett’s housekeeper and companion,” said Jean.

There had now come over her a terrible feeling of anxious despondency, and of bitter, bitter disappointment. She had expected the great man—he had been described to her as a very great man by Mr. Toogood—to have the whole story at his fingers’ ends, and to be, even in everyday life, an ardent, as well as an eloquent, believer in his client’s innocence.

Something of what was passing in her mind became apparent to Sir Harold Anstey, and he felt sharply vexed with himself. Vexed for having got the threads of the story so wrong, and vexed, too, that he had broken through his rule of never seeing, excepting at his own request, any one connected with a forthcoming case.

In his happy, prosperous everyday life Sir Harold rarely came across any girls who seemed to him as prudish as the girl now sitting facing him. Besides, with regard to this girl, who had actually driven a man to commit murder for love of her, such a pose was not only absurd, but very hypocritical.

Still, as he had been foolish enough to see her, he told himself that he might as well make the best of it, and improve his own chances of winning what he was beginning to see was going to be a very important case.

His manner changed; it became, if not exactly more pleasant, then shrewd and businesslike—what his visitor vaguely described to herself as “sensible.”

“I want you to tell me in your own words,” he said impressively, “the story of your acquaintance with Henry Garlett, and what led up to your engagement.”

Quietly, straightforwardly, and, he began almost to believe, quite truthfully, Jean told the simple story of that which had come to her to mean everything in the world.

After she had finished Sir Harold leaned forward.

“If I accept all this as true, I must ask you a most important question, Miss Bower. Who can have had the smallest motive for wishing this lady out of the way? Remember 204that in such a case as this, it is not enough to say, ‘This man did not do it.’ You must, if you can in any way bring it about, be able to declare, ‘But that man did!’ I suppose we may put aside the idea that Mrs. Garlett committed suicide?”

“I suppose we may,” said Jean Bower, but she spoke with a certain hesitation which he was quick to detect.

“Have you any doubt of it?” he asked eagerly. “Did the poor woman suffer great pain? What was her mental state? Can we rely on her doctor to give evidence favourable to Mr. Garlett?”

“Dr. Maclean, who attended Mrs. Garlett, is my uncle,” said the girl slowly. “I know that he believes, as does Mr. Garlett himself, that such an idea as suicide never even crossed her mind.”

Sir Harold Anstey felt both perplexed and irritated. He told himself that there is after all such a thing as being too truthful, too scrupulous.

“That’s a great pity,” he said dryly. “If you could persuade your uncle, Miss Bower, to given even a slight hint that his patient was sometimes very depressed and, if not suffering actual pain, was yet in constant discomfort, it might be a very great help to me in saving Mr. Garlett’s life.”

He was still absolutely convinced that his client was guilty, but somehow he was beginning to feel very, very sorry for this pretty young creature with whom he was holding this curiously unemotional conversation. While she had been telling him the story of her acquaintanceship with the man she now loved, he had suddenly realized that it was pent-up passion, not lack of feeling, that made her speak in so still and quiet a voice.

“So far no arsenic has been traced to Henry Garlett’s possession, and of course that is a point in his favour,” he said musingly.

“I suppose that it is quite impossible that sugar and arsenic can be substituted by accident the one for the other?” asked Jean. “I mean at a grocer’s, for instance?”

“Quite impossible,” he said firmly. “But tell me why you ask the question?”

“Because Mrs. Garlett seems to have had some strawberries smothered in white sugar just before her supper.”

205“Did she say the strawberries had made her ill?”

Jean knitted her white forehead.

“Not that I know of. But Miss Cheale, the lady who was her companion-nurse, at first put down her illness to her having eaten them.”

“Your uncle, I take it, lives close to the Thatched House. Does he make up his own medicines?”

Jean Bower shook her head.

“He did so, I believe, when he first bought the practice, but he gave up doing it years ago.”

“And I take it that everything connected with the dispensary was swept away?”

“A garage has been put up in the place where he used to make up the medicines.”

“Is there a chemist’s shop near by?”

“No,” said Jean quickly. “But the daughter of my uncle’s predecessor, a lady called Miss Prince, keeps certain simple medicines in her house, which she gives to the village people.”

Sir Harold made a note of the name on his blotting paper. “I suppose we may take it,” he observed, “that that lady had no arsenic in her possession?”

“If she had, I feel sure she would have said so,” said Jean. “As a matter of fact, she is Mr. Garlett’s tenant.”

“How old is Miss Prince?” he asked abruptly.

“I should think she must be about sixty——”

“I see. Now, Miss Bower, I must ask you a delicate question. Can you think of any young woman, apart from yourself, who was on friendly terms with Mr. Garlett at the time of his wife’s death?”

To his surprise the girl became first distressingly red and then very pale. A struggle was going on in her mind. Had the big, florid man sitting opposite to her been just a little other than he was, she would have forced herself to tell him of the curious, as she believed utterly untrue, gossip, concerning her lover’s meeting with some mysterious young woman in the wood. But somehow she could not bring herself to mention the sordid story to Sir Harold Anstey.

“No,” she said at last. “I can think of nobody; indeed I’m quite sure there was nobody.”

He looked at his watch.

206“I should like you to wait while I glance over the brief. It contains a précis of the Garlett case.”

He handed her an unopened daily paper.

“Try to forget what I am doing,” he said kindly. “Switch your mind right off it! We shall get along much better when I have mastered the principal points of the story.”

Deliberately he turned his back on her, and she did her best to follow his advice.

It seemed an eternity to Jean Bower, but it was not more than twenty minutes before Sir Harold Anstey put the wad of sheets he had been holding down on the table and turned toward her, an ugly, sneering frown on his broad, shrewd face.

How extraordinary that this simple country chit should have so bamboozled him! If angry with her, he was also angry with himself, and so, though he did not wish to frighten her, it was in a very cold cutting voice that he observed:

“I see, Miss Bower, that a witness, Lucy Warren by name, will be called by the Crown to prove that before his wife’s death you were in the habit of meeting Henry Garlett secretly at night in a wood close to his house.”

“Lucy Warren!” exclaimed Jean Bower, in a tone of utter surprise, as well as of dismayed horror.

She went on excitedly: “We used to wonder who could have told that wicked lie. No one would tell me, not even Mr. Kentworthy!”

Her eyes filled with tears; instinctively she covered her face with her hands.

The great advocate told himself that he was not in the least moved by this display of emotion. Your unsuccessful liar, especially if she be a woman, often covers up her confusion at being found out by shedding quite genuine tears.

“I am sure you understand,” he said firmly, “that this fact, which you very foolishly and dishonourably—if you will forgive my saying so—concealed from me just now, puts a far more serious complexion on our side of the case.”

“I see what you mean,” she said in a low voice; and she looked so unutterably miserable that, in spite of himself, the man’s heart softened.

After all, she was a very pretty little girl—far more pitiful 207and appealing, now that she was showing distress and emotion, than she had appeared when so coldly restrained. He told himself that it was rather beastly that he, Harold Anstey, who was so fortunate, so prosperous, and, as a rule, such a lucky dog with women, should allow himself to be vexed that he had been taken in—for once!

He suddenly began to feel kindly, protective, generous, as well as again shrewdly alive to the importance of winning what was evidently going to be a very big case.

He got up and came and put his big right hand on her slender shoulder: “Now, look here, my dear——?”

She shrank back a little, then drying her eyes, she looked up at him, fearlessly and bravely.

“I am going to do my very best to save your lover’s life. But you, on your side, must make up your mind to be absolutely truthful with me—eh?”

“I will be, Sir Harold—indeed I will be!”

“Well, we may take it, I suppose, that it was a case of love at first sight; that Mr. Garlett was taken with you from the first (as well he might be!) and then he did persuade you, wrongly I admit, to meet him at night in this wood? When I say night, I am well aware that it was not really night. From what this young servant says, she had to be in by ten, so that fixes the time. Can you give me any kind of reason why you should have met him? Any reason you can think of, or even—hum!—invent, will be of value. I realize that you were working with Mr. Garlett, and that you had plenty to talk about of a—well! ordinary, straightforward kind.”

Jean Bower got up from her chair so suddenly that he felt startled.

“I don’t know if anything I say will convince you that I am telling the truth,” she said desperately. “But I swear to you most solemnly before God that I never met Mr. Garlett, either before his wife’s death or since, secretly at night, in that wood or anywhere else. What is more, I am convinced that he never did such a thing, and I can’t believe that Lucy Warren thinks that he did!”

He was impressed in spite of himself.

“What sort of a girl is Lucy Warren? Do you know her?” he asked abruptly.

208“I know her quite well. In fact, the day before Mrs. Garlett’s death I was actually present when, as a result of something she had done, she was given notice to leave the Thatched House.”

“I admit,” said Sir Harold slowly, “that that does provide from our point of view a useful complication. The evidence of a dismissed servant is always regarded as tainted.”

He looked, for the first time, really puzzled and ill at ease.

“Let me see,” he said. “Kentworthy, who was for so many years employed by the Home Office, is the detective we are employing, isn’t he?”

Jean Bower came up closer to him. Somehow she no longer felt afraid of this big, to her singularly unattractive-looking, man.

“We all like Mr. Kentworthy, and I am sure he is honest. But oh! he is not a clever man, Sir Harold. The only thing that makes me happy to be with him”—tears came into her voice—“is that even now he does believe Harry to be innocent. He really does—I do wish you believed it too!”

He was taken aback, touched, and rather amused, by her frankness.

“How dare you accuse me of not believing in the innocence of a man I’m going to defend?” he exclaimed half jokingly. “Of course I believe my client to be innocent until he is proved guilty!”

“Sir Harold,” she said piteously, “tell me if I can help Harry in any way? Is there nothing—nothing that I can do? I would do anything.”

“Sit down,” he said briefly.

She sat down, and he began walking up and down the room. Though she did not know it, that was a good sign. It showed that he was becoming really interested, putting his powerful mind to the solution of a problem that was not, after all, as simple as he had believed it to be.

If this girl told the truth—if her relations with this man she now passionately loved had been what she had just sworn them to have been before his wife’s death—then what could have been Garlett’s motive in poisoning the poor woman? He was also impressed by the detective Kentworthy’s belief in Garlett’s innocence.

209Sir Harold Anstey had had a great deal to do with Kentworthy in another murder mystery case and it had been Kentworthy’s passionless, honest, clear evidence in the box which had hanged Anstey’s guilty client. Kentworthy might not be a clever man—not the Sherlock Holmes every young lady expects a detective to be—but his opinion, especially when it was in favour of a man actually under arrest on a charge of murder, was of great value in the famous barrister’s eyes.

“This is going to be a very difficult, complicated, and anxious case,” he said at last. “All the more difficult because it appears so absolutely simple.”

He saw a look of astonishment flash across Jean Bower’s flushed face.

“To you,” he exclaimed, “who believe this man to be innocent, the case is perfectly simple. But if we can produce nothing better than what we have now got, Miss Bower, judge, jury, in fact——” he hesitated and then went on firmly, “everyone in the case will believe that Harry Garlett undoubtedly poisoned his late wife.”

She answered in a low voice: “I do understand that,” and though she did not flinch, a sensation of numb despair took possession of her heart.

“It follows that we must produce something, anything, that will shake the belief of those on whose opinion, Miss Bower, your lover’s life will hang as by a thread.”

She stared at him, fascinated. The real power of the man was beginning to impress her, to make her feel a kind of confidence in him.

He stopped in his pacing and gazed fixedly down into her troubled, quivering, upturned face.

“Will you give me your word of honour that you will never reveal to anybody the fact that I gave you, personally, any advice concerning your own association with the case?”

“I give you my word of honour,” she said quietly.

“It is because I believe you will keep it,” he said seriously, “that I am going to tell you how I think you can help your lover.”

She waited silently till he spoke again.

“I am one of the few people in my line of life who believe in the amateur detective—and especially in the woman 210amateur detective. Not for nothing were the most dangerous spies in the great war—women.”

A look of pain came into Jean Bower’s face. Unheeding of that, he went on, weighing his words:

“Kentworthy can be trusted thoroughly to get up a case of the straightforward, normal kind. But for this sort of delicate, difficult, dangerous work, I fear he is of little use.”

He wheeled round, and once more began walking up and down the long room.

“And now I’m going to assume that you are right, Miss Bower—that Henry Garlett is absolutely innocent.”

He turned and cast a quick, measuring glance at his visitor.

He was wondering, deep in his heart, if she really did absolutely believe in Garlett’s innocence? If not, he was not only wasting valuable time, but they two were playing at a tiresome game of make-believe.

And then she said so humbly, so touchingly, “Thank you, Sir Harold,” that he felt his question answered.

He went on speaking, swaying slightly as he did so, wholly absorbed in the problem before him. “If this man is innocent, then we must concentrate on the fact that some one else is guilty of the crime of which he is accused. Some human being—man or woman—gave Mrs. Emily Garlett a large dose of arsenic with intent to kill her.” He looked at her fixedly. “Now who was that person? It is up to you, Miss Bower, to find that out, and you have only a month and a few days to do it in, so there’s no time to lose.”

“Tell me how to set about it,” exclaimed Jean Bower, “and I’ll do exactly what you tell me to do!”

“I wonder if you will?” he exclaimed. “I know you mean now to do what I advise, but the worst of amateurs is that they are prone to act from the heart rather than from the head. You won’t like the first job I’m going to put you to.”

“I will do anything,” she said firmly.

“Wait till you hear what it is! The moment you get back to Terriford get an order to see Mr. Garlett alone, or within sight, but not within hearing, of a warder. And then, however disagreeable the job, you must get out of him whether or not this Lucy Warren told the truth concerning 211his mysterious interviews with some woman in the wood near his house.”

“I am absolutely sure it is a lie!”

Sir Harold shook his head.

“This won’t do at all. If you begin by assuring him that you are sure he never did such a thing—then he will find it impossible to admit that he did do it. What you must say is that you can see no reason in the world why he shouldn’t have met and walked with some young lady.”

“How can I do that when I feel sure he never did do it?”

He looked at her kindly.

“Forgive me, Miss Bower! I was a fool to think that you could bring yourself to act the part of even the most amateur of detectives. Put the idea out of your mind, and rest assured that I will do everything in my power to save your lover’s life.”

Jean rose from her chair.

“No, no, no!” she cried, “of course I’ll do exactly what you advise. I’ll tell Harry that his meeting a girl in that way and in that place was not so very strange—nay, more, I’ll try and force myself to believe it!”

“That’s right,” he said heartily, “now you’re acting like a brave, sensible girl, and not like a foolish, obstinate woman.”

“But supposing he says it was all an invention of Lucy Warren’s——?” She looked at him anxiously. “Then I suppose I must get Lucy Warren to say she told a lie?”

“Yes, that will be the next step, and if you fail I shall succeed when I have got her in the witness-box,” he said grimly. “That is supposing she did tell a lie. But, Miss Bower——?”

“Yes?”

“Suppose that Garlett admits that he did meet a lady in the wood—what then?”

He answered his own question.

“You have then what we are looking for—a second human being with an interest in Mrs. Garlett’s death. I suppose,” he said suddenly, “that it has not occurred to you that the young woman may have been no other than Lucy Warren herself?”

“There are things, Sir Harold, which I suppose even you would admit are impossible,” she said quietly.

He looked at her, and remained silent. How make this 212girl understand that innumerable men of a superior social caste have made love, will make love, are making love all the time, to girls like Lucy Warren? From the moment he had read the notes made by Kentworthy, he had asked himself whether after all, Lucy Warren, in her obstinate determination not to reveal the name of the woman with whom she said she had seen her master, might not have had the very best of reasons for her obstinacy.

“We will suppose,” he went on, measuring his words, “that Mr. Garlett, while admitting he was in the wood, refuses to give up the name of his companion. Well, if you fail to extract that information from Lucy Warren you must try and think of some other way of discovering who the woman was. To do that, you must, if you will forgive the expression, stick at nothing.”

She said timidly: “I suppose you’ve seen the anonymous letters—the letters which started the whole trouble?”

“The anonymous letters?” he exclaimed. “There isn’t a word about them here!”

Sir Harold Anstey went over to his writing table and sat down.

“Have you copies of these letters in your possession?” he asked.

“Yes, I have them here,” she said in a low voice, “but I don’t want to get Mr. Kentworthy into trouble, Sir Harold. I’m afraid he ought not to have kept these facsimiles.”

“Thank God, he did! Show them to me at once.”

He spoke in a peremptory tone.

Jean Bower opened her bag and silently laid the three sheets of paper before him.

He bent over them for what seemed to her a very long time, but at last he looked up.

“It’s a monstrous thing,” he exclaimed, “that these were not put in among the exhibits connected with the case.”

“So Mr. Kentworthy says,” observed Jean. “He thinks them an integral part of the story—that was his expression.”

“Miss Bower?”

He turned, and faced her squarely.

“Find the human being who wrote these three dastardly letters—and I will undertake to save your lover’s life!”

213
CHAPTER XIX
As she walked away from the great advocate’s chambers Jean Bower felt happier than she had felt since the terrible morning when Harry Garlett had been arrested in her presence on the charge of murder.

Though she felt certain that her forthcoming interview with Garlett would not bring the result Sir Harold evidently expected it to do, yet, deep in her heart, she was full of joy at the thought of seeing the man she loved. Her heart had hungered for him, and nothing but the knowledge that he shrank from seeing her in the shameful place where he was now strictly confined had prevented her making an effort to see him. It was an infinite comfort to feel that it was now her duty to do so.

She had deliberately sent no word of her approaching return to Bonnie Doon, and when she went out of Grendon station, where she had always been met by either her uncle or her aunt, even by Elsie if neither of them could come, there swept over her a curious feeling that henceforth she must live her life alone, if only because of her promise to the man on whose instructions she was now acting.

Quickly she walked away from the station, intent on seeing Mr. Toogood, so that her interview with Harry Garlett should be arranged as soon as possible.

But when she turned into the High Street of the busy country town she became aware that she had been recognized by certain of the people who had passed her, and by the time she had reached the lawyer’s office some ten to twenty men and women were dogging her footsteps.

She began to feel like a hunted thing, and oh, the relief of finding herself in the hall of the house where she had come with her uncle on the day her lover had been arrested.

This time Jean was shown straight into the room where Mr. Toogood, the last time she was here, had remained closeted with her uncle for so long.

214She went, as was her nature, straight to the point.

“I have made up my mind to ask for an order to see Mr. Garlett,” she said quietly. “And I should be grateful if you would tell him, Mr. Toogood, that it is because I have to speak to him on a matter of importance that I’m doing what I know he does not wish me to do.”

“I’ve always thought his attitude as to that quite unreasonable,” said the lawyer in a decided tone.

“How would you like Mrs. Toogood or your daughter to see you in prison?” asked Jean in a low voice.

“There’s something in that—especially as I suppose you realize, Miss Bower, that you won’t see Mr. Garlett alone?”

“I thought perhaps that as I want to see him on private business, I would be granted the privilege of seeing him alone.”

He shook his head.

“There is no country in the world, Miss Bower, where such privileges are extended to a prisoner under remand. I, as Mr. Garlett’s legal adviser, have free private access to him. But you cannot expect the same privilege. Whatever you have to say to him will be said in the presence of two warders.”

He saw that this was a great surprise to her, and she looked deeply troubled.

“I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” he exclaimed. “I’ll put the case to the Governor. I suppose you’ve met him?”

“I remember that he was in the cricket pavilion at that big match last May, and I even had a talk with him. But I don’t suppose he’ll remember me.”

“You do yourself an injustice!” exclaimed the old lawyer gallantly. “I expect Colonel Brackbury remembers you very well indeed. In any case I will put the matter to him personally. I take it, Miss Bower,” he looked at her hard, “that you really require to see Mr. Garlett on business?”

“I would willingly tell you why I wish to see him, but I have given my word to tell no one.” She hesitated, and then, “I have been asked to put a certain question to him.”

“Kentworthy making the poor girl do his dirty work,” thought Mr. Toogood. Aloud he observed:

“Well, my dear young lady, I’ll see what can be done. I know the Governor will stretch a point if he can. He is 215on very cordial terms with your uncle, and I seem to remember that he’s a regular cricket maniac. Funny, isn’t it, that such things should make any difference? But they do! I’ve found out that the lawyer who doesn’t allow for the oddities of human nature makes a great mistake—I mean professionally. I hope you’ve left every one quite well at home, eh?—I mean at Bonnie Doon?”

“I’ve been in London,” she answered, “so I haven’t seen them since the day before yesterday.”

“That fixes it!” said the lawyer to himself. “I wonder what Kentworthy wants that poor girl to get out of Garlett? Surely he’s never told her to find out who was in the wood with him? That would be hard on her. Yet he may be beginning to see what I’ve always seen, that Garlett’s one hope is to bring some other woman into the case.”

They both got up; he strolled across to his window, and saw with dismay that a crowd had gathered below on the broad pavement, waiting for the heroine of the Terriford Mystery to appear.

“Haven’t you got a car?” he asked, surprised.

“I thought of walking home.”

“No need to do that,” he said kindly. “I’ll telephone and ask my daughter to bring our car along. She’ll get you to Bonnie Doon in no time! Meanwhile, will you go into the other room for a minute? I have a private message to give her.”

Slightly surprised, Jean did as he asked her. Then, when he had got through to his house, he said: “Is that you, Kitty?”

“Yes, Father.”

“I want you to run the car along here. Are you listening?”

“Listening hard, Father!”

“Good! Now don’t come through the High Street. You’ve got to make your way somehow into Juniper Alley, to the back of this house. There’s a crowd gathered at the front door waiting for that poor child, Jean Bower, to come out. I want to get her away without any one seeing her. You’ll only have to drive her to Bonnie Doon. It won’t take you long.”

Then he brought his young visitor back to his room.

216“Now, look here, my dear, we’ve got about ten minutes before my daughter can be here, and I haven’t had an opportunity of seeing you alone since we met—you remember when? I want to tell you to be of good heart! It’s a tremendously important point on your side—I wonder if you realize how important?—that no arsenic has been traced to Harry Garlett’s possession. What’s more, poor Mrs. Garlett was poisoned with white arsenic. We’ve got one of the biggest poison experts in the world ready to go into the box and swear that Mrs. Garlett was poisoned with pure arsenic, not arsenic extracted from some article in common use.”

She looked at him gratefully, but remained silent.

“Then there’s another point,” he went on. “A great deal has been made of those strawberries which were eaten by Mrs. Garlett on the fatal evening. As a matter of fact, no one saw her eat them, and no one has the slightest idea who brought them into her room. It’s very unfortunate that your uncle conveyed the impression, as he certainly did, that he knew as a fact that Mrs. Garlett received those strawberries from her husband’s hand. He knew nothing of the kind.”

“I’ve never been able to understand the question of the strawberries, and why so much importance has been attached to them,” said Jean Bower in a low voice.

“Importance has been attached to them,” said the lawyer decidedly, “because they seem to have been the only vehicle by which the poison could have been administered. The Prosecution have two witnesses ready to swear that they saw the small dish of strawberries, sprinkled thickly with powdered sugar, outside Mrs. Garlett’s door at five o’clock, and that at seven o’clock the dish was no longer there.”

“How strange,” said Jean in an oppressed tone.

“Mr. Garlett denies having even seen the strawberries. The lawyer who took Miss Cheale’s evidence on commission received from her the assurance that she did not know who had given Mrs. Garlett the fruit—she simply assumed that it must have been Mr. Garlett. Sir Harold Anstey—you will remember I told you about him last time you were in this room—will certainly make the most of the fact that no one knows what happened to those strawberries! Not only the fruit, but the dish, one of a set of four, disappeared from the top of the chest of drawers where it was known to have 217been that afternoon. The apparent obliteration of the dish is a very curious circumstance.”

“I suppose it is,” said Jean doubtfully.

“That odd occurrence, coupled with the fact that no purchase of arsenic has been traced to our friend, will certainly be an important point in his favour, so you must keep up heart.”

“I try to,” said Jean. “I’m feeling happier——”

She stopped short. She had nearly said “now that I have seen Sir Harold Anstey.”

Mr. Toogood looked at his watch.

“Kitty will be waiting for you now.” He opened the door, and then, to her surprise, said a little hurriedly: “No, not downstairs, but upstairs, Miss Bower! My daughter prefers driving up to the back of the house.”

As he uttered these lying words, he was leading her up the staircase, she bewildered but obedient. When they reached the top story he led her down a passage, and then they walked silently down what had been the back stairs of the old mansion when it was a dwelling-house. Once on the ground floor, he took her rapidly through a small paved court into a kind of little alley, where the car stood waiting.

“Good-bye, Miss Jean! I’ll see if I can catch the Governor to-day, and then your interview will take place, if it can be managed, to-morrow morning.”

It was not often that Mr. Toogood felt a pang of curiosity. As a rule, lawyers know too much, not too little, of their clients’ affairs. But he did wonder very much what it was that Kentworthy had asked Jean Bower to find out. He felt sure that she would fail in her task. Harry Garlett was the last man to be persuaded to say anything he did not wish to say, and if he had indeed been holding clandestine meetings in the wood with some woman whose name he alone knew, he would certainly not “give the lady away.”

Mr. Toogood chuckled a little as he found his way back to his room, remembering that his good friend, Colonel Brackbury, Governor of His Majesty’s Prison at Grendon, had said to him only two days before:

“I feel interested in Jean Bower. I thought her a most attractive girl! We had quite a talk at that cricket match last spring. I should very much like to see her again.”

218Late that same afternoon Elsie put her head through the door of the dining room of Bonnie Doon.

“Ye’re wanted on the telephone, Miss Jean.”

“Would you rather I went, my dear?” asked her aunt kindly.

“I’ll go,” said the girl quickly. “I think I know who it is.”

And, sure enough, it was Mr. Toogood.

“It’s all right, Miss Bower. If you will be at the prison at ten o’clock to-morrow morning, the Governor will himself be present at your interview with Mr. Garlett. He says he will keep out of earshot. I hope you are pleased.”

“I am indeed,” she called back, “and very grateful to you!”

And then she walked back slowly to the room where her uncle and aunt were sitting. She was sorry, now, that she had not confided to them her intention of seeing Harry Garlett, but she had shrunk from doing so, for she knew they were hurt with her for concealing the reason of her visit to London.

As she opened the door she said abruptly: “I am going to see Harry to-morrow morning. I called at Mr. Toogood’s office on my way home and arranged it.”

As neither of them spoke, she went on, catching her breath a little:

“Try not to mind my not being able to tell you why I want to see him. I’ve promised not to do so—but it is important. It may make a difference at the trial.”

There was a pause, and then Mrs. Maclean said a little coldly:

“Neither your uncle nor I wish to interfere in your private affairs, my dear. You are grown up, and you have a right to do as you please. But your uncle has a very wide knowledge of life, and I think you would probably find that, in the long run, it would be worth your while to take him into your confidence.”

Jean burst into bitter sobs, and her aunt got up from her chair and put her arms around her.

“Come, come, don’t be offended, childie! It’s only that we’re so anxious—that’s all. The matter’s so terribly important, not only to you but to your uncle—perhaps you don’t quite realize that, eh?”

219“How d’you mean?” exclaimed Jean, glancing from the one to the other.

“Well,” said Dr. Maclean slowly, “I’ve not said anything about it, for I’ve known that your trouble, my dear, has been much, much greater than mine. But of course this terrible affair is a fearful blow to my professional reputation. And though for a little while people will be eager to see me—after I’ve been badgered and worried like a rat worried by a terrier, in the witness-box—the better class of my patients are sure to say: ‘Better not send for old Maclean. D’you remember that stupid mistake he made over the death certificate of that patient of his who was poisoned?’”

“I didn’t realize all that. Oh, how sorry I am that I’ve brought all this awful trouble on you!” exclaimed Jean, looking from the one to the other of them with unhappy, haunted eyes.

For the first time since this great trouble had come on them all, they separated that evening not on their usual affectionate, open terms, the one with the other. And it was after a night spent wide awake in bitter self-communing that Jean got up early the next morning.

“I’ll breakfast with you in the kitchen,” she said to Elsie. “I’ve got to be at the prison by ten o’clock, and I should like to get out of the house before my uncle and aunt come downstairs.”

The modern prison of Grendon was built at a time in the nineteenth century when there was still but small reverence for historic buildings. Within the vast enclosure surrounded by walls five feet thick still stands the mound crowned by the ruins of a Norman keep known to antiquaries as Grendon Castle. And close to that high mound rises the mediæval mass of brick and stone locally called the Old Prison. To the imaginative historian that house of woe, long emptied though it be of suffering humanity, is of far greater interest than are the remains of the castle.

Last, but, from the point of view of the townspeople, by far the most important, within the same vast enceinte is the eighteenth-century pillared building where the county assizes are always held, and where many a famous trial has taken place. But the public doors to the Assize Court are reached 220from without the great walls, some way from the jealously guarded entrance to the modern prison, and to the vast space in which it stands.

Till comparatively lately, the public were freely admitted to what is still called the Castle yard, and public meetings of deep import to the state were held there. But now it is difficult to obtain even permission to visit the Castle ruins and the Old Prison.

Jean Bower had walked quickly through the keen morning air, and so, being full half an hour early, she paced up and down for what seemed a long time under the stout walls; at last, when her watch told her it was a quarter to ten, she rang the bell of the small postern door cut into the great gate.

There came the sound of footsteps on stone flags, the clanking of big keys, and then the door was opened by a gray-haired man in uniform.

Taking the admission order from her hand, he glanced over it, and looked at her with quickened interest.

“You’re a bit early, if I may say so,” he said kindly, “but you follow me, miss, and I’ll see what I can do.”

As she walked under the vaulted gateway, past the quaint little opening which evidently led into her guide’s home, Jean found herself on the edge of a vast paved enclosure.

To her left rose the huge mound, and in front of the mound, as if cut out of the paving stones, was a round lawn of closely cropped turf.

Then, gradually, she became aware that behind a row of tall, now leafless, plane trees was a strange-looking building of dark red brick and gray stone. There was something stark and desolate about the irregular outline which showed sharply clear against the pale blue of the winter sky.

Her companion followed the direction of her eyes.

“Ay, that’s the Old Prison,” he observed. “Folk used to come from a long way to go over that place, but now it isn’t shown—ever. But as you’ve got a few minutes to spare, miss, maybe you’d like to have a look at it?”

He took her assent for granted, and slowly they began walking straight toward what Jean now knew to be a very famous place—famous if only because it had been the first prison visited by Elizabeth Fry.

221“Where is the real prison?” she asked hesitatingly.

“You turn yourself right around-about and you’ll see it clear enough.”

She turned quickly, and beyond the Castle mound, far to the right, she saw a large, commonplace-looking yellow brick building which reminded her of a modern factory. The knowledge that Harry Garlett was there gave her a stab of pain. Quickly she turned away and once more stared at the sinister-looking Old Prison, and it was with a thrill of surprise that she saw that the low doors giving access to the dark, grimy-looking building were all wide open.

“I should be afraid to come here at night,” she exclaimed. “That place looks as if it were haunted.”

“You’re not the only one to say that. My wife wouldn’t go in the Old Prison not after dark—for a hundred pounds! It’s said that on All-Hallows Eve one ’ears groans and awful moanings agoing on the whole night. However, I’ve never been there to see, and bless you! people are sure to say them sort of things about that sort of place. Now you come along—and I’ll show you what many a lady in Grendon would give a good bit to see.”

He moved on, his bunch of keys clanging in his big hands as he walked, till they came right up to the widest of the low entrances to the deserted building.

The black oak iron bound door had been clamped back to the wall, leaving the way in clear.

“I’d best go in first,” said the porter; and Jean, following him, found herself almost at once in pitch-darkness, groping along a narrow passage. Suddenly he took out of his pocket and turned on an electric torch. But that only seemed to make more dense the thick-feeling blackness, though it enabled Jean to see that on each side of the passage were tiny, windowless cells. Was it possible that human beings had ever been confined in such holes as that?

They walked on and on along the lightless, airless burrows, and once the girl stumbled badly on the uneven earthen floor.

At last the porter stayed his steps and held up his hand; she saw it gleaming redly against the bright white light cast by his torch.

“This is the place folk most wants to come and gloat over,” he observed in a half joking tone.

222They were on the threshold of a low vaulted chamber, and a moment later he and Jean were standing in the middle of the otherwise empty, windowless crypt-like room, by what looked like an enormous kitchen table, excepting that it was made of stone. Jean’s guide threw the light of his torch right on to the gray, stained surface, and she saw that into the stone two deep ruts had been cut, one each way.

“Folk were drawn and quartered on this ’ere table,” he explained, “and not so very long ago, missie! The last lot done ’ere was a batch of what they called ‘the rebels,’ those Scotchies who reckoned they wanted another king. Just before my time they used to keep ’ere, careless-like on the table, the big knife and fork with which they quartered the poor wretches. But now they’re put away in what’s called Grendon Museum.”

As if talking to himself, he went on musingly: “’Anging’s a sight more merciful than the old ways they ’ad of doing men and women to death. That I always will maintain. But a ’anging’s a gruesome sight. Maybe we’ll have time for me to take you just round to see the gallows. Leastways you won’t see much! Only a kind of platform, you know—that’s where they’re turned off. It’s just off the new prison.”

And then the good man felt considerably startled, for the girl he had supposed to be by his side staring down at the stone table had disappeared!

He flashed his torchlight round the stone walls, and with relief perceived that she was leaning up against the side of the arched entrance which gave into the black passage way.

Her face was drawn, and very pale, and all at once he remembered her relation with the man who, it was confidently expected by most of the people connected with Grendon Prison, would be the next poor wretch to be “turned off.”

“Bless my soul!” he exclaimed, “I oughtn’t to have said that. I clean forgot about your friend, missie. What a fool I am to be sure!”

There was a tone of deep dismay and regret in the voice in which he uttered these words.

“I’m all right now,” Jean said faintly. “I suddenly felt queer. I think the air must be very bad in this place.”

223“Of course it is,” he agreed, “no draught through.”

And then he went on, this time in a very serious voice, “As I’ve said so much, miss, I’ll say just one thing more to ye——”

“Yes?” she said questioningly, standing away from the door. She had no idea what he was going to say, and yet somehow she felt horribly afraid.

“’Anging, as now practised,” he observed, “is a very merciful form of death. It isn’t ’anging at all, so to speak—they just breaks the poor chap’s neck and it’s all over in a second! ’E don’t know it’s ’appening till it ’as ’appened—if you take my meaning?”

She “took his meaning” only too well, and, with a wild wish to escape from her now torturing thoughts, she turned out of that awful room of death, and almost ran along the cavernous way and so out into the fresh air.

Her guide followed, uncertain whether he had been right or wrong in saying what he had last said to her. “But there!” he said to himself, “the poor little missie may be glad to remember it some March morning.”

But when he saw her face in the daylight, he exclaimed, “Dang me! The wife’s right! I do talk too much—that I do.” And then, shamefacedly, he added: “Best say nothing of my having shown you a bit of the Old Prison, eh? I mean to the Governor?”

“Of course I won’t,” she murmured.

Soon they reached the great gate, and then the man took hold of Jean Bower’s arm.

“Mary Ann,” he called out.

A tall thin woman came out: “Yes?” she said acidly, “what d’you want, John?”

“Give this young lady a drop o’ that brandy I’ve got in the cupboard. Give it her neat—no water, Mary Ann! That Old Prison of ours ’as turned ’er over queer.”

The woman gave a quick look at Jean, and then she ran indoors. A moment later she came back, a small glass in her hand.

Hardly knowing what she was doing, the girl gulped down the brandy. Almost at once she felt better, and the colour came back into her face.

224
CHAPTER XX
Jean Bower sat in the waiting room of what was called the New Prison. Though she was clad in a warm fur cloak which had just been given her by her uncle and aunt, she felt dreadfully cold. She was miserably anxious and uneasy as to her coming interview with Harry Garlett. How could she ask the man she loved so degrading a question—how make him understand the great importance all those concerned with his defence attached to what she took to be a lying bit of low gossip?

The door of the waiting room opened and Colonel Brackbury walked in.

“Miss Bower? I had the pleasure of meeting you early last May.” And then he shook hands with her warmly. But although he was touched at his visitor’s look of deep sadness and at the pallor of her young face, he hardened himself to say that which he knew must be said.

“I have stretched a great point in assenting to your wish for what practically amounts to a private interview with Henry Garlett. I must ask you to give me your solemn word of honour that you will not hand him, or try to convey to him, anything surreptitiously. Also that you will not make the slightest attempt to approach him.”

“To approach him?” echoed Jean uncertainly.

“There will be a table between Mr. Garlett and yourself. You must not stretch across it and try to shake hands with him, for instance.”

“I quite understand, and I promise to do what you ask.”

“Some time ago a lady was allowed to see her husband, who, like Mr. Garlett, was as yet untried. Although a warder was present at the interview she managed, unseen by the warder, to roll along the floor toward her husband a small ball containing a dose of prussic acid.”

He looked at her significantly, but Jean made no comment. 225It was to her as if she was living through some awful nightmare.

“I understand that you desire to see Henry Garlett with reference to some matter concerning his defence?”

She answered in a strangled tone: “But for that I should not have asked to see him.”

“I should like you to know,” he said kindly, “that we are doing everything we can to make Mr. Garlett comfortable. In our country a man is accounted absolutely innocent until he is adjudged guilty. Apart from the irksomeness of the confinement, and the not being able to see his friends freely, Mr. Garlett is leading much the same life as he would lead outside, were he, what of course he is not, a recluse. I am taking special pains to see that he has good and nourishing food.”

And then, rather to his surprise, for he really knew very little about human nature, Jean Bower began to cry.

“Come, come,” he said dismayed, “this won’t do! You must do your best to hearten him up, you know.”

“I will,” she whispered, “I will indeed.” And then she added a pathetic word. “I didn’t think you would be so kind.”

“I’m not kind,” he exclaimed testily. “I’m only doing my duty. There! That’s right”—for she was trying to smile.

And then they started walking down what seemed to the girl interminable cold, clean, bare passages. But at last they passed through a baize door into what had once been the Governor’s official residence before the pleasant villa which the Brackburys occupied had been built, and where were now situated the prison offices.

The Governor opened the door of a large room and courteously stood aside to allow her to pass in. And then suddenly Jean, through a mist of blinding tears, saw Harry Garlett.

He was standing close to the wall behind a long narrow table to her left. For a moment she thought him unchanged; and then she saw that all the healthy, outdoor-man look had gone, and that there was an awful air of strain in the eyes which seemed the only thing alive in his pale set face.

A fire was burning at the other end of the room, but it was very cold, and the atmosphere was full of the musty feeling of an uninhabited room.

226Colonel Brackbury brought over a chair for Jean to sit upon. Then, looking from the girl to his prisoner, he said: “And now I will leave you to your talk, Miss Bower. You see that door over there? I shall be close to it, reading my paper, and I shall not be able to hear anything you say unless you raise your voices.”

He walked quickly down the long room, and Jean sat down on the chair he had provided for her.

For a few moments neither of them said anything. She sat, with downcast eyes, trying to repress the tears which would come in spite of her effort to keep them back, while he, poor wretch, gazed at her, all his soul in his sunken eyes remembering.

At last she whispered: “You don’t mind my having come? There is a real reason, Harry, or I would not have done it.”

“It was only because I didn’t feel I could bear the thought of your coming to such a place that I wrote as I did,” he answered in a low voice. “But, oh, how glad I am to see you now.” Sinking his voice yet further, he whispered, “My darling, darling love.”

She felt as if the sobs she must repress would strangle her utterance. But at last she managed to say: “I have come to ask you to tell me something——” She stopped, not knowing how to word her stupid, her unnecessary, her insulting question.

“Yes,” he said eagerly. “Ask me anything in the world, Jean.” And then, as she at last looked up, and he saw the lines that pain and acute suspense had written on her face, he gave a low groan.

“Oh, my God!” he exclaimed, “I can’t bear your looking like this, Jean. Mrs. Maclean told me you were quite well.”

She said quietly: “I am quite well. But I lay awake last night thinking of to-day. I’m so afraid”—she waited, then began again—“I’m so dreadfully afraid that you’ll be angry—that you won’t understand. But the question I’ve come to ask you is supposed to be so important. And yet? Oh, Harry——”

He broke in: “What is it? Come, Jean, you’ve nothing to be afraid of! You could never make me angry—surely you know that? Whatever you ask me I’ll answer truthfully.”

227“The other side have a witness,” she murmured in a low strained voice, “who will swear that she saw you at night in the wood which joins part of your garden, with a young woman.”

Instead of the quick, contemptuous denial she had felt so absolutely certain would come, Harry Garlett remained silent for what seemed a long time.

Then he asked: “Who is the witness?”

“Lucy Warren.”

His face had turned a dull red, and, as if not knowing what he was doing, his hands began nervously drumming on the table before him.

“Lucy Warren says the person you were with was a stranger to her,” added Jean slowly, and she saw a look of intense relief flash over his worn face.

“Well, my dear,” he said gently, “what is it you wish to ask me?”

“I want to know,” she said in a trembling voice, “whether what she says is true.”

Before he spoke she knew from the look on his face what his answer, if he spoke the truth, must be. And her heart was contracted, for the first time in her life, with a passion of anguished jealousy.

She looked at him fixedly, and something of what she was feeling showed in her set face and wide-open eyes.

At last he said slowly, as if the words were indeed being dragged out of him:

“Yes, it is quite true that I was there twice at night, and with a woman. But the fact has nothing remotely to do with my forthcoming trial for murder. So you must not ask me who the woman was, Jean. It would be most unfair to drag her into this terrible business of mine. I am sure you will understand that?”

He was looking at her straightly, but speaking with obvious embarrassment and unease.

“Of course I was a fool to do a thing so likely to cause poisonous gossip,” he went on. “But you will believe me when I tell you, before God, that it was not my fault. There are certain things concerning his past life that no man has the right to reveal, even to his nearest and dearest.”

Then more confidently he exclaimed, “Jean? You do 228understand—you do agree that it would be a shame to bring some one who has nothing to do with the matter at all into such a case as mine will be?”

“Of course I agree to that,” she whispered. “And yet, Harry, and yet——?”

She looked at him so imploringly that for the first time he leaned forward, in his eagerness, across the table which separated them, and there came a warning cough from the distant half-open door.

He straightened himself quickly, and over his face she saw flash a painful look of impotent anger.

She said desperately, “You really feel you ought not to tell who was with you that night in the wood—not even to me?”

“Not even to you! I’m not a quixotic fool, my darling. If I thought it would make the slightest difference, of course I would obtain permission from the person in question to reveal her identity. But it would make no difference. It would simply”—he stopped, then choosing his words carefully, he concluded—“draw a hateful, vulgar red herring across the path. I’m afraid that is the object of the people who want me to give you the name of this lady who was with me in the wood.”

As she made no answer to that, he looked at her searchingly.

“I have a right to ask you to believe that I did nothing of which I am now ashamed.”

And then there fell on them a long, long silence. Jean felt overcome, dazed with miserable suspicions. It was as if this man whom she still loved with so absorbing a passion had suddenly revealed himself as being quite other than what she had thought him.

Again there came the sound of a little cough, followed by the rustling of a newspaper being slowly folded up.

Jean did not look round, but she could hear Colonel Brackbury coming toward them.

“Miss Bower, I’m afraid your time is up.”

He looked at his prisoner. “Come round to the end of the table, Garlett. I know Miss Bower would like to shake hands with you.”

He turned away, deliberately, and then Harry Garlett took the poor girl in his arms.

229“I swear to you,” he whispered brokenly, “that you have been my only love.”

She raised her face, her lips, to his. “I do know that—God bless you, my own darling!”

And then quickly they fell apart, for with a warning “Hm! Hm!” the Governor, without turning round, exclaimed, “Come along, Miss Bower.”

Jean Bower walked away from the prison gate in a maze of such misery as she had not believed a human being could feel. For the first time in her life she realized what some people learn very soon, and others never learn at all, even if they live to be quite old people. This is that we do not know, with any real knowledge, even those whom we most passionately love and trust.

She had felt so sure, so absolutely certain, that the story of Harry Garlett’s meeting a woman in the wood was a malicious lie! And now she knew that it was true, and that there was some strange, painful mystery behind it.

She had seen his pale face flush, and the look of embarrassment, almost of shame, with which he had muttered: “There are certain things about his past no man has the right to reveal—even to his nearest and dearest.”

Her mind hastily surveyed the young women known to her who lived in and about Grendon. There were at least a dozen with whom Harry Garlett was on easy terms of acquaintanceship. But no young people had ever come openly to the Thatched House. Mrs. Garlett did not care for girls, and Agatha Cheale was well known to have no friends, with the exception of Miss Prince.

She walked on, threading her way as if blindly through mean, and shabby streets, and, as she looked furtively to the right and left, she knew that in every one of those little houses there were people who were honestly convinced that Harry Garlett had poisoned his wife for love of her. Small wonder that she hurried on till at last she was in the open country, with not a creature in sight. There, standing on a field path, she stopped and burst into bitter tears.

Crying did her good; it seemed to lift something of the load weighing on her despondent heart. She dried her eyes, vaguely telling herself that she would walk on till she felt 230too tired to go on—then, turning back, she would in time reach Terriford village.

She had been walking for close on an hour, her nerves sensibly soothed by the fresh air, when all at once she saw in front of her a farmhouse which she knew to be the home of Lucy Warren.

The sight of this place reminded her that her next painful task must be to see Lucy Warren, to try to persuade the girl to tell her that thing which it was so vital she should know, and which yet she knew Harry Garlett hoped she would never know. There are people—perhaps more women than men—who delight in discovering that which those about them do not wish them to know. But Jean Bower was the exact opposite. She had an acute—some people might have said an absurd—sense of honour. It would have seemed to her dishonest to try and worm a secret, even a little secret, out of a child.

She wondered uneasily how she could see Lucy Warren without Miss Prince becoming aware she had done so. And then fortune favoured her, for, as she took the turn which would soon bring her to Terriford, she saw Lucy Warren coming toward her.

The two met in the middle of the field path, and Jean saw an eager look leap to Lucy’s eyes. Lucy would have passed any other young lady by with a curt nod, but this particular young lady was not only always kindly, and even friendly, in her manner, but was also the heroine of the most exciting affair which had ever happened in the recollection of the whole neighbourhood.

“Lucy! I am so glad to meet you——” and then Jean held out her hand.

The other grasped it warmly. “You do look bad, miss!” she exclaimed, real concern in her voice.

“I feel very tired,” faltered Jean.

“Won’t you come to the farm and rest a bit? There’s only Mother there.”

“I’d rather stay out here. Oh, Lucy, I know that you have it in your power to help Mr. Garlett!”

With the caution always shown by the more intelligent of her class when face to face with the unknown, Lucy Warren remained silent for a while, gazing, however, fixedly into Jean Bower’s troubled face.

231“How might that be?” she asked at last.

“The gentleman who is to defend Mr. Garlett says it’s all-important to find out who was with him in the wood the night you saw him there,” answered Jean in a trembling voice. “I do implore you to tell me who it was, Lucy?”

“I promised Mother I wouldn’t say nothing,” said Lucy hesitatingly.

“But your mother’s a good woman! She wouldn’t want you to keep anything back that might save an innocent man!” cried Jean wildly.

“I always said to Mother that I should have to say summat—sooner or later.”

Jean stared at the girl in breathless suspense.

“The young lady as met Mr. Garlett in the wood,” said Lucy at length, “was Miss Cheale.”

“Miss Cheale? Are you sure of that, Lucy?”

There was deep disappointment, instinctive relief, and a touch of incredulity in the way in which Jean Bower repeated the name of the young lady who for a year had been an inmate of the Thatched House.

Lucy moved a little closer to Jean Bower.

“Us servants,” she said meaningly, “knows a lot more than we’re meant to know. We all knew well enough that Miss Cheale fair doted on Mr. Garlett—though he was always trying not to see it. Why sometimes she’d be talking about him in her sleep!”

Jean Bower’s face, from pale became very red. Could this be true? Or was it only an example of the kind of vulgar, dangerous gossip of which she now knew village life to be ever full?

“What I’d like to ask Miss Cheale,” went on Lucy in an excited voice, “and what ought to be asked her, is why she told them lies about them strawberries?”

“Lies?” repeated Jean in an oppressed tone. “I don’t understand, Lucy. What lies did Miss Cheale tell?”

“She told your uncle, miss, that Mr. Garlett had given the missus some strawberries that had been left for her by Miss Prince. Well, that was just a lie! Them strawberries were there on a chest of drawers in the corridor outside Mrs. Garlett’s room in the early afternoon. I saw them there myself. Then they just vanished off the chest of drawers—long 232before Mr. Garlett went into Mrs. Garlett’s room. I can swear to that! I happens to have a special reason for remembering it, for he said to me, ‘Lucy, will you please go in and ask Mrs. Garlett if she can see me now?’ And I says, says I, ‘No, sir, I don’t feel I can do that. The missis is so angry with me about last night.’ So I went and got the housemaid to go in—that’s why it remained so plain in my mind.”

“You mean,” said Jean slowly, “that the strawberries disappeared early in the afternoon.”

“Ay, that’s what I do mean,” said Lucy confidently. “They were there, a good ’elping, not more, on one of them small dishes belonging to the best dessert service.”

“Who do you think gave them to Mrs. Garlett?”

Lucy hesitated. “If it comes to that, the missus may have got them for ’erself.”

“I thought she never went into the passage.”

“She came downstairs in the middle of the night spry enough,” said the girl bitterly. “Besides, there’s nothing to prove she got the poison with them strawberries—it’s only a idea.”

But Jean was hardly listening, for her mind was full of something very different.

“You are quite sure, Lucy, that it was Miss Cheale who was in the wood with Mr. Garlett?”

“I’m more than sure. I saw ’er quite plain.”

“Then there’s nothing more to be said. But I’m bitterly disappointed,” said Jean sadly. “Somehow I had hoped that whoever was in the wood with Mr. Garlett would—” she did not quite know how to frame her meaning—“would, well, provide a clue,” she ended.

Lucy gave an odd glance at Jean. She felt very sorry for Dr. Maclean’s niece.

“Miss Cheale was in the village the very day Mr. Garlett was sent for trial,” she muttered.

“That’s impossible,” said Jean quickly, “she was ill in London that day. Her evidence had to be read. She couldn’t have been anywhere near Grendon.”

“She was at our place—at the Thatched Cottage—early that afternoon, and in an awful state, too! I heard her tell Miss Prince that she knew Mr. Garlett was innocent.”

233“You heard her say that?”

“Yes, I did,” went on Lucy excitedly, “and don’t you forget that it was Miss Cheale who always saw to Mrs. Garlett’s food.”

She had got it out now, that suspicion, that almost certainty, that hope, that had long tormented her.

“But why,” asked Jean in an oppressed, bewildered tone, “should Miss Cheale do such an awful thing?”

She felt as if she was living through one of her terrible nightmares.

“Miss Cheale,” said Lucy firmly, “thought that if she could get Mrs. Garlett out of the way Mr. Garlett maybe would marry her.”

“I can’t believe that, Lucy.”

“Anyway, she was terribly upset when she heard that you and him was going to be married. She took on awful! I heard what she said to Miss Prince, though they thought as how I was out, I had come in, unbeknown to them, and heard it all. Again and again she asked: ‘But is it true, Mary, or just gossip?’ And Miss Prince, she kept on saying: ‘It is true, Agatha, only too true; I asked Mrs. Maclean, and she admitted it.’ Then she says, ‘You must pull yourself together, and call on your pride.’”

“D’you think it would be any good if I went in to Miss Prince and asked her about Miss Cheale?” asked Jean in a hesitating tone. “I mean, couldn’t she ask Miss Cheale what she meant by saying that she knew that Mr. Garlett was innocent?”

A look of terror came into Lucy’s face.

“Oh, miss, you won’t go and do that? It would get me into terrible trouble! They’re such friends—she’d never say a word against Miss Cheale, I know she wouldn’t! Why, Miss Prince had a letter from her this very morning. That’s why I’m here now. Miss Cheale wrote as how the woman who keeps the place where she’s living in London can’t get any help, and Miss Prince thought my sister might go—just to oblige. Not much! But of course I couldn’t but say I’d ask.”

“Can you give me Miss Cheale’s address?” asked Jean in a stifled tone.

Lucy began hunting in the narrow pocket of her ulster.

234“Not that you’ll get anything out of her! She’s an artful one—she is!”

She held out a crumpled piece of paper.

Required from next Monday a respectable young woman to help. Previous experience not essential. Wages, fifteen shillings a week and all found. A comfortable home for the right person. Apply Mrs. Lightfoot, 106, Coburg Square.

Jean Bower gazed down at the piece of paper now in her hand for some time. Lucy was looking at her anxiously, not liking to speak. Had she been wise to confide her great secret, her frightful half-suspicion of the woman she hated, to this young lady?

At last Jean turned round.

“Lucy,” she said, “I’m going to trust you with a secret.”

She spoke with a touch of solemnity which impressed the girl.

“I’m going to London to take this situation offered by”—she looked again at the paper—“Mrs. Lightfoot.”

“You never are!”

“It’s my only chance of getting at Miss Cheale—of finding out anything she may know. I don’t believe—I can’t believe—that she had anything direct to do with the poisoning of Mrs. Garlett. But she may know who did it. And now I want to know if I may go to the Thatched Farm and write out two telegrams, one to Mrs. Lightfoot, the other to a friend of mine with whom I mean to spend to-night in London. Would you take them for me to the post office?”

“That I will,” said Lucy.

As they walked toward the farm together, it was as if there sounded loudly in Jean’s ear the words Sir Harold Anstey had uttered a couple of days ago: “Find the man or woman who wrote those anonymous letters, and I promise to save your lover’s life.”

Jean Bower now felt that she knew who had written those letters.

235
CHAPTER XXI
To Jean Bower it was an extraordinary stroke of good fortune that to-day, for the first time for many weeks, Dr. Maclean had persuaded his wife to accept an invitation to luncheon. Thanks to that circumstance, the overwrought girl was able to go back to Bonnie Doon, pack a small bag containing the clothes she felt she must take with her, write a short note to the kind folk to whom she stood in so curious a relation, and, finally, enjoy a comforting talk with Elsie MacTaggart.

Somehow she now felt much more at ease with Elsie than with either her uncle or aunt. Elsie was a whole-hearted believer in Harry Garlett’s innocence, and a believer, too, that he was sure to come out, as she put it, “all richt.” So it was that at the very last moment before quitting Bonnie Doon, she knew not for how long, Jean went into the kitchen and took tight hold of Elsie’s work-worn hand.

“I’m going away, Elsie,” she said, “in order to do something that may help Mr. Garlett. I can’t say more, and if I did they wouldn’t approve.”

The girl continued, somewhat bitterly: “They’ve wanted me to go away—they’ve longed for me to go away! Well, now I am going away. I don’t know for how long. Here’s a note in which I’ve given an address where I can be written to, and of course I’ll let them know how I am, now and again.”

Then as she heard the sound of a motor, the colour rushed to her face.

“They can’t be back yet,” she exclaimed in a dismayed tone.

Elsie smiled. “That’s the machine I just telephoned for to Grendon. You were never going to walk to the station? That would have been a foolish thing to do when maybe you’ve some hard days in front of you.”

Jean took Elsie in her arms and hugged her. Then she kissed her on both cheeks. “Good-bye, Elsie, I know that you wish me well.”

236“Ay, indeed, I’ll be doing that.”

And so, very quietly and without consulting anybody, Jean Bower started on what was to be her great adventure. It was such a comfort to feel that to Rachel North, at least, she owed no explanations that she did not choose to give, no duty of any sort, only gratitude for present kindness done. It was also soothing to know that in London she would be but one of millions of people intent on their own business and not on hers. How different from a place where she could hardly walk a few steps in the daylight without knowing that even the village children were pointing her out to each other!

Cuthbert Street, Belgravia? The address sounded grand to her country ears. But she knew that Rachel North in far-away days had had a large circle of friends. Perhaps it was some kindly survivor of those distant days who had lent her a flat.

On and on her taxi took her, through the dark streets, for it was a late Saturday afternoon, and to Jean, looking out of the windows, the long dreary streets seemed to grow shabbier and shabbier.

At last it turned into a thoroughfare which seemed interminable, and of which the houses had that depressing, almost terrible, look of having seen better days. The plaster was peeling off the stucco walls, and here and there a window was broken. There was a look of indescribable grime and dirt, even on the pavements.

At last the driver drew up opposite the very last house in the street, one that overlooked a railway bridge.

“I reckon it’s here,” he said looking round dubiously.

Jean told herself that there must be some mistake. The house looked even more forlorn than did its neighbours, and while she was glancing up at the gray crusted walls and dirty windows, she heard the shriek of a train, and a moment later there came a deafening roar.

“Come, miss! This is 200, Cuthbert Street, right enough. You give me my fare, and let me go off,” said the man rather roughly. “I’m on another job in a few minutes, and this is such an out-of-the-way part.”

She paid him the big sum marked on the taximeter, took her hold-all out of the cab, and with a slight sensation of fear, 237as well as of deep surprise, she pressed the top one of the four knobs which seemed to indicate that the house had four occupiers.

For what seemed a considerable while nothing happened; and she pressed the second knob. Then, at last, a slatternly looking woman opened the door and looked at her disagreeably.

“You’re not wanting Mrs. Stratford?” she asked.

“Does Miss Rachel North live here? I’ve come to stay with her,” said Jean, trembling a little.

“As I’ve had the trouble of opening the door to you, you can walk up. It’s the top floor. But you’d no business to press my bell.”

“I’m sorry,” faltered Jean.

“We’re not allowed to put our names outside the door. And it’s a shame, that it is! I’m always coming up from my basement just to open the door to some other lady’s visitors.”

The woman turned round, leaving the front door open. Jean shut it, and began slowly walking up the narrow dark staircase. The house looked more than dirty; it looked degraded.

On and on she went, past frowsy-looking landings, till she reached the top floor. There—a change indeed! A piece of linoleum, scrupulously clean, was on the landing, and, as she moved cautiously forward and knocked on the door opposite the top of the staircase, a voice which had once been very familiar, called out: “Come in!”

She turned the handle, and saw before her a plainly furnished, but pleasant little sitting room, and a girl who she knew was Rachel North, rose from a low chair by the fire, and came forward.

“Why, Jean, I didn’t expect you for another hour! I looked out the trains from Grendon. You must have come by a slow one.”

“I did,” she answered rather breathlessly. “I was in such a hurry to get away.”

“I know—to get busy,” said the other nodding her head.

She was a reserved girl, and she did not kiss Jean Bower. Instead, she took both her visitor’s hands, held them firmly, and gazed into her face.

“I won’t say much,” she exclaimed. “But I should like 238you to know that I do understand what you are feeling, what you are going through, and I’ll do everything in my power to help you. You know I’m engaged all day. I’m so glad to-day happened to be a Saturday. But for that I shouldn’t have got your telegram until after you’d arrived in London!”

And then she drew Jean toward the bright little fire.

“It isn’t a bad place,” she said critically, “once one’s up here. The rest of the house is filthy.”

She took Jean’s hold-all. “Is this all you’ve brought?”

“Yes,” said Jean, and there crept a tone of defiance into her voice. “I think I may as well tell you at once why I’ve come to London. I’m going to take a place on Monday as general servant in a house where some one lives who, I believe might help, if she chose to do so, to prove Harry’s innocence.”

“I see,” said Rachel North slowly, “a bit of detective work? Knowing how sensible you used to be, I suppose that you’re acting under advice, eh?”

“Not altogether—but yes, I think I may say I’m acting under advice. Perhaps I ought to go out now and get clothes of the kind needed for that sort of work?”

There came a troubled look into her face, and the older girl felt touched, even a little amused.

“Don’t you worry about clothes,” she exclaimed. “I came very low down in the world at one time, and I’ve kept the things I wore then. They’re awfully shabby, but they’re quite clean. I don’t quite know why I kept them—it was a sort of superstitious feeling. I felt that if I gave them away, I might want them again. But now, well, my dear, you know I’ve all sorts of queer ideas—now I think I was probably intended to keep them that I might help you!”

That this question should be settled so easily and so well was more of a relief than perhaps Jean would have admitted even to herself. She had given the matter of her outfit for 106, Coburg Square, a good deal of anxious thought on her railway journey. She realized that the whole of her scheme would fail if the woman to whose employment she was going suspected that she was playing a part. She was too sensible to suppose that she would be able to pass herself off as a simple country girl of the working class, but she did hope 239that she would be able to make her employer believe that she was out to earn an honest living, in however humble a capacity.

And then, after they had enjoyed their cold supper, and while Jean was lying back in an extraordinarily comfortable couch which yet looked oddly big for the little room, her friend exclaimed:

“Perhaps I’d better tell you now that you’re really on what’s going to be your bed. I’ve thought it over, and though I should have been delighted to give you my bedroom and to have slept in here, I somehow felt that you’d far rather sleep here and leave me my bedroom, eh?”

“Indeed, indeed, I would!” exclaimed Jean.

“I know,” the other nodded. “I once went to stay with a friend, and I can’t tell you what I felt when I discovered the next day that she had turned out of her room and slept in the kitchen!”

Jean Bower awoke to find her friend smiling down at her. There was a cup of tea in her hand.

“Now then, you just drink this up. Then I’ll light the fire, and after I’ve done that I’ll bring you those clothes I told you about. I’ve just had a look at them. They’re old-fashioned and ugly, but I don’t know that that really matters. After all, your object is to look the part——”

Jean sat up and drank the tea thirstily. Oh! how restful to be here with this quiet, reserved young woman who, while obviously sympathizing with her, was not in the least inquisitive.

She caught Rachel North’s hand and pulled her down.

“You know I’m grateful to you, without my saying so,” she whispered. “I shall never forget how good you’ve been!”

“I’ve not been more good to you than two or three people were to me, in my deep trouble. But I took my trouble in a way I hope you will never do, Jean,” replied the other girl. “I cut myself off from everybody after my father’s death. I was wrong in that—I see it now. But I was so unhappy”—her face altered, it became convulsed with feeling, and she turned quickly away, busying herself in making and lighting the fire.

240Then she went off into her room and came back with a curious little heap of garments in her arms. There was a brown serge coat and skirt—the skirt unfashionably full, while the coat was short and skimpy. Then there were two clean, washed-out-looking flannel blouses.

“This, I take it, is the sort of thing you want? But I strongly advise you to buy some thick woollen underwear. After all, the woman won’t see what you’re wearing underneath your coat and skirt.”

“How clever you are, Rachel. I should never have thought of that,” said Jean admiringly.

“You don’t want to go and fall ill the first day you’re there. Especially as you’ll have need of an alert mind. I’m afraid you’ll have very nasty food.”

“I don’t mind that,” said Jean quickly.

“Oh, don’t you? Well, you wait a bit. It’s easy to talk like that! I’ve come to think that nice food is one of the most important things in the world. If I were you I should take some malted milk, or cod liver oil and malt, in your trunk.”

“Trunk?” queried Jean doubtfully.

“A good, big, deep suitcase rather than a wooden box. The woman who’s going to employ you won’t think your bringing such a thing queer at all. In fact, I think she’d think it odd if you came with practically nothing but a hold-all.”

“I suppose that’s true,” said Jean. “All right—I put myself in your hands. You shall tell me what to do!”

Rachel North smiled. She was one of those women who love power, and, given the chance, exercise it wisely.

“If you don’t mind getting up a bit early on Monday morning there’s a place close by here, a great big cheap store, where all the working girls go. We’ll get some kind of suitcase there, and we’ll buy two sets of their best warm underclothing. If your employer should see them by any chance you can say they were given you by a kind lady!”

And then they both burst into peals of girlish laughter. Jean had not laughed so heartily as that for many a long day.

“By the way, have you chosen a good name to call yourself by?”

241“I’m going as ‘Elizabeth Chart,’ my mother’s maiden name,” and the laughter died out of her eyes.

Suddenly Rachel said, “I must go out and get my Sunday papers. When one is leading a lonely life one does depend tremendously on reading, and, I’m not ashamed to say it, on newspaper reading. Papers are my only luxury, and on Sundays I have a regular debauch!”

Jean was staring into the fire.

“I suppose you’ve read everything that’s been printed about, about”—and then she said rather defiantly—“about Harry and me? I know there must have been horrid things, for Uncle Jock made me promise not to look at the papers—not even at the paper they take in at Bonnie Doon.”

“Yes,” said Rachel North reluctantly, “I have seen a good deal about you, Jean. But everything so far about you has been kind.”

And then Jean jumped up from her chair.

“I hate that!” she exclaimed. “I’d far rather they said horrible things—as I know they do about Harry.”

“They have to be careful,” said Rachel North in a detached tone. “No paper is allowed to prejudge a case.”

“Yet they do prejudge it!” exclaimed Jean Brower excitedly.

“Well, yes, in a sense I’m afraid they do.”

When Rachel North came back she handed the bundle of papers to Jean, and began bustling in and out of her tiny kitchen getting dinner ready—a delicate little bit of undercut which was to be served French fashion with fried potatoes and some salad.

Jean began looking at one of the papers listlessly. Then all at once she realized that in the middle of the big sheet was a square space, and within it, running ribbon-wise across the top ran:

THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY

AN EXCITING DEVELOPMENT

Exclusive to The Sunday Critic

The Sunday Critic learns on absolutely reliable authority that the prosecution believe that they are at last on the track of the one missing link in The Terriford Mystery.

242That Mrs. Emily Garlett died from a large dose of white arsenic is certain, but till two days ago there was no clue as to where the murderer, the murderess, or the murderers, had obtained the poison. This doubt, so we are credibly informed, is on the point of being solved. The discovery has not changed the present situation, and no further arrests are contemplated.

Jean read the paragraph again and again. Then she called out, “Rachel, come here, and tell me what this means?”

Rachel North hurried into the room. She knelt down by the girl’s side and read the paragraph.

“It means,” she said in a quiet, matter-of-fact voice, “that if this paper is to be believed the prosecution have found where the arsenic was purchased. The implication is that it was purchased by Mr. Garlett; hence those words, ‘The situation is unchanged. No further arrests are contemplated.’”

And then something happened which, though it terrified Rachel North, gave a few moments of merciful oblivion to Jean Bower. The supple, rounded figure, full of the strength of living life, suddenly sagged. She would have fallen on the floor had not the other caught hold of her. But Rachel North’s hospital training stood her in good stead. She laid the unconscious form flat on the floor, and rushing off to her bedroom, came back with some sal-volatile which she forced through Jean’s lips. And at last, with a low moan the girl regained consciousness.

After a few moments she struggled up on to her knees. Then she looked round her, dazed, forgetting where she was, and what had happened. But all too soon everything rushed back into her mind.

Painfully she lifted herself up again on to the chair.

“I want to read that paragraph again,” she said in a trembling voice. “I want to understand exactly what it means.”

“I don’t think you will be able to do that, dear. It’s put in that odd, uncertain way on purpose; but honestly, Jean, I don’t think you need attach much importance to it!”

And then, for the first time since her arrival, Jean Bower had a heart-to-heart talk with Rachel North over the whole mysterious story. They discussed every alternative possibility, and, as so often happens, Jean began to feel happier, 243more self-controlled, as a result of that long talk. One thing which greatly comforted her was that after hearing all she had to say Rachel North suddenly exclaimed:

“I think I was wrong as to what I said to you—I mean as to the prosecution having found the place where Mr. Garlett may have purchased arsenic. What I think has happened is that they have found something in the Thatched House from which arsenic can be extracted. Now apparently arsenic can be extracted from almost anything! That being so, it would be strange indeed if nothing of the sort had been found.”

“That’s true,” said Jean, “and yet”—her face clouded over—“and yet, Rachel, they’ve left no stone unturned—one might almost say that literally—to find arsenic in the Thatched House.”

Rachel North took her friend’s hand. “You will want all your wits about you during this experiment that you are going to try. If you allow yourself to be unnerved by what has been published by that paper then I’m afraid you’ll injure your chance of success. From all you tell me, I agree with you that that woman Agatha Cheale knows far more than she has chosen to tell. Her behaviour after Mr. Garlett was committed for trial—I mean her behaviour in coming down to see Miss Prince—is to my mind almost an indication that she knows something she is unwilling to reveal. Now I wonder—perhaps you’ll be shocked at what I’m going to say, Jean—I wonder if Miss Cheale—well, to put it plainly, was fond of Mr. Garlett?”

Jean looked at Rachel.

“Yes,” she said slowly, “I’m afraid Miss Cheale did care for Harry, and it’s because I can’t help suspecting that she had something to do with the writing of those anonymous letters that I’m going to the house where she is living. She’s only seen me twice in her life. I feel sure she won’t know me again, and, as I’ve already told you, Sir Harold Anstey thinks it is all-important that I should find out who wrote those letters.”

“I agree,” said Rachel quickly. “Whoever wrote those letters was either instigated by the most fiendish spite, and simply wanted to make Mr. Garlett miserable for nothing, or else he or she must have known that if an exhumation 244should take place arsenic would certainly be found in Mrs. Garlett’s body.”

“I think Agatha Cheale wrote those letters to make Harry wretched—to punish him for not having loved her. If I thought she knew Mrs. Garlett was poisoned, then I should regard her as——” she broke off in what she was going to say, and the other exclaimed, “A—murderess? Yes, that’s the only logical conclusion!”

245
CHAPTER XXII
“Can you tell me the shortest way to Coburg Square?”

“It’s round by the Foundling Hospital. I’m going that way myself, so you’d best come along with me.”

The man peered through the dark fog-laden air into the young pale face looking up at him from under the brim of a singularly unbecoming plain brown straw hat. He was an old bachelor who never, if he could help it, spoke to a woman, but he had been mollified by the sweetness of her voice.

The Foundling Hospital? It was a comfort to her in her present forlorn condition to think of all that that great house of human pity and sympathy had done for innumerable deserted and friendless orphans.

For the first time in her life she was assailed by that most unnerving of companions, “Little Devil Doubt.” What she was about to do was surely a terrible risk? If she failed, as she might well fail, and her desperate enterprise were to become known, would she not be universally condemned? Might it not even get into the papers? Harry Garlett’s betrothed taking a place as a servant for his sake! She could almost picture the terrible headlines! She felt so nervous, so excited, that when the deep voice of her conductor suddenly interrupted her anxious self-questioning, she stumbled, and would have fallen had not he put out his hand.

“If you just turn down to the left here,” said the man, “and then turn sharp to the right, the house you want will be within three or four of the corner of the square.”

In response to her word of thanks, he took off his hat and went his way. Jean then walked on slowly, and now and again she stopped. This was her last chance to change her mind, to give up what she well knew most of the people who had known and respected her in her short life would consider a crazy adventure.

246When she came to the end of the long street which led into the square she pressed her cold hand across her face. Her eyes were smarting, partly with the fog, partly from the tears she had shed in the night. She felt unutterably sad and discouraged, and yet deep in her heart she longed to engage in what she believed would be a duel between herself and that strange woman, Agatha Cheale.

If Lucy Warren’s tale were true, Agatha Cheale was the one person in the world who had had a vital reason for desiring Mrs. Garlett’s death.

Throwing off “Little Devil Doubt,” Jean decided to go on. She crossed over to the corner house of the square. To her left she could dimly discern the railings of the narrow garden facing the dark houses to her right.

There was no one in sight, and she felt strangely eerie walking along the wide uneven pavement trying to make out the number on each door. Even the street lamps seemed to gleam more dimly here than elsewhere.

She found 109. Then the gloomy-looking unlit house with the portico must be 106.

Blindly she groped for a bell, and at last she felt a row of knobs. As her fingers slid over them uncertainly there came over her a sudden feeling of acute fear. What if Agatha Cheale should open the door and recognize her?

Then she told herself that her fear was absurd. She had only met Miss Cheale twice. The first time in the cricket pavilion where Mrs. Garlett’s housekeeper had been absorbed in looking after the numerous guests and their entertainment. Then, again, for a few moments on the morning when Miss Cheale, livid with anger, was giving notice to Lucy Warren; and on that day, she, Jean Bower, had been wearing a large hat which completely shadowed her face.

And then, with intense relief, she reminded herself that of course her way of entrance should be by the back door. Creeping out from under the dark portico, she felt along the iron railings. Yes, here was the area gate! And luckily it was unlatched. She pushed it open and found that it led to a steep stone staircase. Down she went, feeling her way from one worn step to the next till she reached the bottom.

She was now in a small pit-like yard, and to her right, from behind what was evidently the kitchen window of the 247cavernous old house, there shone a bright light. As she could see no door, she knocked, at last, timidly on the window. A moment later a narrow door was opened wide and she walked through into a stone passage lighted by a gas-jet, while a not unkindly voice exclaimed:

“You’re Elizabeth Chart, I take it? Didn’t think you’d come for another hour, my dear. Come into my kitchen, do! And I’ll have some tea ready for you in a jiffy.”

The speaker was a gray-haired, red-faced woman, immensely stout, and dressed in an old-fashioned alpaca dress. She wore a Paisley shawl neatly pinned across her vast breast with a cameo brooch.

“Elizabeth’s a mouthful—so if you don’t mind I’ll call you Bet.”

“I’ll like that,” faltered the girl.

“Now then, Bet, you go right into my kitchen and get warm. ’Twill be a great relief to me, I reckon, having a country girl after them London sluts. I was that pleased when I got the telegram saying you was coming this afternoon that I could ’a’ danced!”

It was a homely-looking kitchen with a big red fire in the old-fashioned, wasteful grate. The bright light the girl had seen from outside came from a chandelier hanging in the middle of the ceiling. Under the light the two faced one another—Mrs. Lightfoot, the housekeeper, and Bet Chart, the new servant. With thankfulness Bet noticed that her employer had a shrewd, good-humoured face, and, in spite of her huge girth, a brisk, cheerful way of moving about.

“’Tain’t no good taking you upstairs yet. You can just pop your things off in my room. This way, please!”

She led the way into what had evidently once been the butler’s pantry in the stately old house.

“I’d ’a’ liked to ’ave ’ad you near me, my dear, but I wouldn’t keep a dog’s kennel in any of the other rooms in this ’ere basement; they’re that damp and dark.”

A fire was burning in the room they were now in, and by its light Jean saw a big bed and some nice old-fashioned furniture.

“This room and next door to it is my ’ome,” said Mrs. Lightfoot with pride. “You’ll sleep under the roof. I goes up and down as little as I can, for though I used to live up to 248my husband’s name I can’t do with stairs! Still I can move about quick, as you’ll soon see. Like to wash your ’ands? You can do so in my basin as a treat to-day, but henceforth you’ll ’ave to wash ’em at the sink.”

A few moments later Jean came back into the kitchen. She felt very strange and odd in her full brown skirt, her flannel blouse, and the neat, Quaker-like little white muslin cap she and Rachel North had bought that morning.

“That’s right!” exclaimed Mrs. Lightfoot, “not ashamed to wear a cap as was our last fine lady? A little treasure you’re setting out to be. The last ’ussy I ’ad ’ere, she’s got a job as a demonstrator—putting rouge on her lips and whitening her face. I reckon that’ll suit her ladyship for the present, till she moves on to—I won’t demean myself by saying where.”

She had set out bread, butter, and jam on the kitchen table. Then, apparently afraid lest her praise should make her new help uppish, she observed critically:

“You don’t look over-strong for a country girl. Mind you, there’s stairs ’ere—stairs, stairs, stairs all the time!”

“I’m very strong,” said Jean in a low voice, “it’s only that I’m tired to-day. You see I’ve come a long way.”

“Ay, that’s true—and not over familiar with London, I daresay.”

“I don’t know London at all.”

Jean looked straight into the other’s fat face. She was glad to be able to say something which was absolutely true.

“There now, fancy that! You surprise me—seein’ that I can see you’ve ’ad some edication. I’m a Londoner born and bred—proud of it, too. It’s unlucky you and me can’t go out together. I’d take you to see the sights! But you’ll be able to go ’ere and there on your afternoon off. A young girl like you won’t be long before she gets a friend to walk out with.”

To that Jean made no answer. Instead she sat down and poured herself out a cup of tea.

“As you come from Terriford I expect you’re quite familiar-like with all the parties concerned with this ’ere Garlett murder—The Thatched ’Ouse Mystery some calls it? Ever seen my top floor—Miss Cheale? She’s in it, of course!”

249“I don’t think I’ve ever seen her,” faltered Jean.

She bent her face down to her plate. “I wasn’t in Terriford long.”

“I’ll give you a peep at Miss Cheale some time or other,” said Mrs. Lightfoot kindly. “But she’s the one of my lodgers you won’t ’ave much to do with. I do the waitin’ on ’er myself. She simply can’t abear strangers! But you’ll ’ave to help do ’er room, mind you. ‘What the hear don’t ’ear, the ’eart don’t grieve at.’ She thinks I never lets any one into her room. But there she’s mistaken. I can’t do all the work, and it’s lucky for me that my front ground floor’s been hempty a while, though now you’ve come, my dear, I don’t mind ’ow soon it fills up.”

Jean’s hands were shaking. How stupid, how idiotic of her, not to have realized that Agatha Cheale’s connection with the Thatched House would be known to Mrs. Lightfoot!

“She’s takin’ on awful about that case,” went on the housekeeper. “She left ’ere over a year ago to go to that very Mrs. Garlett as lady-’ousekeeper. I says to ’er then, ‘You’re a fool to give up your hindependence, Miss Cheale, my dear!’ But she would do it. And see where it’s landed ’er!”

“Has Miss Cheale ever told you how she thinks Mrs. Garlett was poisoned?” asked Jean.

“I simply wouldn’t dare ask ’er. I ’ave tried once or twice to sort of lead on to it delicately—but she can’t bear the littlest question about it. Oh, she’s a fly one! It wasn’t till I seed her name in the paper that she let on she’d anything to do with it. Since then—well, it stands to reason she’s ’ad to say just a bit about it to me now and again. What’s upset her so as been those dratted lawyers—first one side, then the other, coming and worrying ’er somethin’ hawful! That’s why she’s ’ad to speak to me about it so that I should prevent ’em coming up to her. And I ’ave prevented ’em!” exclaimed Mrs. Lightfoot.

Unconsciously she put her arms akimbo and assumed a fighting attitude.

“Many a fine bold lie ’ave I told in ’er good cause! Be spot truthful when you’re young, but as time goes on, allow yourself a little law. That’s a motter for you, Bet Chart, 250and a good one, too. After all, Miss Cheale can’t say what she don’t know—can she?”

“No one knows anything,” said Jean at last. “It’s a terrible, terrible mystery,” and she pushed her plate away.

“Now you just go on eating, Bet. It’s real butter; no cheap margarine for me! Never would ’ave it in my ’ouse for all I’ve come down in the world, as the saying is. During the war plain honest dripping as I got off a chef I know: since then the best butter. You’ll find I live up to what I said, ‘a comfortable ’ome for a suitable person.’”

So Jean forced herself to eat a bit more of Mrs. Lightfoot’s excellent bread and butter.

“In a way ’tis a mystery,” went on her employer, “though in another way ’tis no mystery at hall! Young man marries old woman for ’er money. Gets fair sick of ’er. Meets a pretty young girl. Takes a fancy to ’er and does away with the old ’un. So far all clear. As I says to Miss Cheale early this very morning: ‘Don’t you take on so, miss. It’s ’appened plenty of times before and it’ll ’appen plenty times again—before the judgment day! Anyway,’ I says, ‘it’ll be all the same a ’undred years hence.’ But between you and me, Bet Chart, I’ve another idea.”

“There are some people who think that perhaps Mrs. Garlett poisoned herself,” said Jean.

She had given up the pretence of eating and was now looking fixedly into Mrs. Lightfoot’s red face.

“Well, that I never will believe! Not if the King himself come out of Buckingham Palace and commanded me so to do! I’ve read pretty well heverything that’s been written about this ’ere so-called mystery. I makes a special study of murders. Always ’ave done so, though it turns me faint to drown a new-born kitten in warm water. I’ve been found right many a time, and that afore the judge and jury ’ave made up their minds!”

“And what d’you think now?” asked Jean eagerly.

“More than once I’ve hasked myself whether that forward hussy, Jean Bower, did it? She ’ad every reason to want the poor soul out of the way, but it don’t look at present as if she’d hever ’ad the chance.”

“No,” said Bet Chart quietly, “Jean Bower never even saw Mrs. Garlett.”

251“That, beggin’ your pardon, Bet, may be a tale! I don’t see ’ow you could know, anyway. It would ’a’ been strange if they’d never met, living in the same place, and both being gentry. And she the doctor’s niece! What’s she like? I suppose you’ve seen ’er?”

“Yes,” said Jean. “I’ve seen her. She’s just ordinary—like everybody else.”

“They’re generally the worst,” said Mrs. Lightfoot. “Very much the worst—if you’ll believe me. I’ve given a lot o’ study to that girl. There’s some one a protectin’ ’er, not a doubt of it! Else why wasn’t she called when that man ’Enry Garlett was committed for his trial? She ought to ’a’ been! They did their level best to try and compel my poor top floor to go to Grendon town. She ’ad to ’ave a doctor, and ’e ’ad to give ’er a certificate. And even that wasn’t enough! We ’ad a lawyer ’ere—a man from the Crown, he called ’isself—but I don’t believe for one minute the King knew the way ’e went on. ’Ow ’e worried that poor young woman! She made me stay in the room all the time—and a good thing, too. There ’e was, close up to ’er bed, with a big book and a fountain pen—why it wasn’t decent. She wouldn’t eat any supper after that. She cried and cried, and I was fair tormented about ’er! Yet they left that Bower girl—that forward sly ’ussy—habsolutely alone. What d’you say to that?”

“They didn’t leave her absolutely alone,” said Jean slowly. “Some one came from the Crown to see her and cross-examine her, too.”

“I’m glad of that,” said Mrs. Lightfoot, “very glad, indeed! That’s the best word I’ve ’eard you say, Bet Chart, about the whole business. I’m intending to get in at that trial even if I’m crushed to death doing so! It’ll take the place of my summer outing. I don’t often go in for that sort o’ treat, but I did see The Brides in the Bath man. I saw him black-capped.”

“How dreadful!” whispered the help, and she turned even whiter than she had been before.

“I’d a friend at the Old Bailey, one of the judge’s clerks—my ’usband’s uncle was Mr. Justice Barnaby’s clerk—and that gives me a sort o’ connection with the law. So they’re very kind to me when I goes down to the Old Bailey, and I 252could get in much oftener than I does if I could leave the ’ouse. Still, as I ’opes and believes you’ll be ’ere when ’Enry Garlett’s trial takes place, I’ll just give myself the treat of seeing my poor Miss Cheale in the witness-box.” She waited a moment to take breath, then added significantly: “You just look over there!”

Jean turned round quickly to see a great pile of newspapers lying in a corner of the kitchen.

“Miss Cheale takes in five newspapers a day, if you’ll believe me—just with the idea of seeing something new about that hawful affair. If it had been war-time I could ’ave made my fortune out of them old papers, but now the dustman wants to be paid for carrying them away! But there! I do get something out of it, for o’ course I reads ’em all—when I ’ave the time, that is! As for Miss Cheale, she just pores over them, and hevery one of the Sunday papers she takes in too. I ’aven’t ’ad time yet to look over yesterday’s. But I will this evenin’, and it’ll be a treat for you too, Bet. There was something in one of them papers as greatly upset Miss Cheale. She wouldn’t say nought about it—but I knew! It’s never out of her mind, that it isn’t. She even talks about it in her sleep. My last girl used to ’ear her, and it fair give ’er the creeps.”

“Hadn’t I better begin washing up?” asked Jean timidly.

“Well, yes, I reckon you ’ad. All the people in this ’ouse goes out to work for their daily bread. Leastways, all but one does. I won’t ’ave no drones if I can ’elp it. No drones and no—you can guess what sort I mean for all you’re an hinnocent young thing. I could ’ave made a lot of money, retired too, and lived in peace and plenty, if I ’adn’t been a respectable woman, but there! I can’t help it—I just ham.”

Jean made no reply to that obviously truthful statement. Instead, she carried the tea-things she had used one after the other to the broad sink.

“Hullo,” called out Mrs. Lightfoot suddenly, “ever ’eard of a tray?”

The girl turned round surprised.

“How stupid of me,” she exclaimed. And then suddenly her heart almost stopped beating, for Mrs. Lightfoot walked straight up to her and said, “You’ve never been hout before? 253You’re not the plain country lass I took you for. What har you?”

“I’m the daughter of a man of business, Mrs. Lightfoot. My father failed before he died. I never was taught to do anything, though I did what I could in a hospital during the war. When I heard of your situation last week I was on my beam ends.”

Mrs. Lightfoot looked relieved.

“I guessed you were something just not quite common,” she admitted cautiously. “The way you put your cup to your lips, in a sort of finicky way, henlightened me. I expect you was sent to a genteel school.”

“I suppose I was,” said the other almost in a whisper. “But I don’t mind hard work. You’ll see I don’t.”

And then suddenly she began to cry. “I—I’ve been so unhappy,” she gasped, “since my father died.”

“There, there! You’ll be ’appy ’ere. Don’t you worry, and don’t you go and think, as many a silly young girl supposes nowadays, that all the good chaps were killed in the war. If there’s only one left, you’ll find him right enough! And if not, I’ll find ’im for you. There’s some good elderly gents about too, just now. Better be an old man’s darling than a young man’s slave. Hany old barndoor can keep out the draught! But no carryings on with the lodgers, mind! But there, I won’t insult you, Bet, my dear, by supposing you capable of doing such a thing. Likewise, you won’t ’ave a chance, for I does most of the waiting on the gentlemen myself.”

Then came three knocks on the floor above the kitchen ceiling.

“What’s that?” exclaimed the new “help.”

“My hinvalid—a mystery ’e is—Mr. Gee by name—though not ’is real one, between you and me and the lamp-post. But you’ll have nothing to do with ’im.”

She went off upstairs: then came back, and said suddenly:

“Can you cook at all, my dear, or shall I ’ave to teach you that—as well as the use of a tray?”

But Mrs. Lightfoot spoke very good-humouredly.

“I can cook simple things,” said Jean, “and I know some nice Scotch breakfast dishes.”

“I don’t want you to go a-spoiling my lodgers! Plain 254and good—that’s my motter. Eggs and bacon week-days, an’ midget sausages on Sunday for a treat. My gentlemen pays for ‘bed and breakfast,’ and though it’s near double what it was afore the war, yet it needs a good bit more contriving than it did then, I can tell you. As to Miss Cheale, well, she goes on another plan. I just buys what she wants. She makes a tidy bit of money out of them Russians she works for. Besides, as you maybe ’ave ’eard, she was left a little fortune by that poor poisoned soul!”

At six-thirty there came the sound of the big front door opening. Then it was shut slowly, carefully.

“That’s Mr. Robins,” remarked Mrs. Lightfoot; “’e’s a very careful gentleman. Halways the first to come in, for the reason he works near ’ere at the British Museum. A proper, quiet sort o’ man, though they do say ’e was a regular devil in the war! But there! ’E’s settled down peaceful nicely now. ’E’s got my big front drawing room, and beautiful ’e’s made it with some things ’is ma left ’im when she died.”

Something like a quarter of an hour went by, and then again there came the sound of the front door opening. This time it was banged to.

“Mr. Goodbody,” said the housekeeper. “A merry, cheerful little gentleman, as lives up to ’is name. Going to be married, so we sha’n’t keep ’im long. I’ll miss ’im when ’e goes—not that I exactly envy ’is missis, mind you, but still it’s nice to be always greeted with a laugh and a joke.”

“That’s Miss Cheale,” exclaimed Mrs. Lightfoot, as a church clock near by struck seven. “Sometimes she works even later than this. ’Er arrival is the signal for me to get busy. I got ’er a nice chop to-day. She going to ’ave fried potatoes with it—fried potatoes and brussels sprouts—likewise a meringue. Not one of those bought meringues—all glue and a lick of cream. But a meringue I’ve got to fill chock-full of whipped cream. Miss Cheale knows what she likes, and, unlike some folks, she’s willing to pay for it.”

As she spoke she got up, and began moving about, and when Jean offered to help her she shook her head.

“Let be, let be,” she exclaimed; “’nother night I may let you try your ’and at Miss Cheale’s supper, but to-night I’d 255better do it, for I knows what she likes, and exactly ’ow she likes it. But I’ll tell you what I will let you do! I’ll let you carry up the tray as far as the landing. We must take the risk of ’er seeing you—morbid, ain’t it, ’er dislike of seeing people?”

Twenty minutes later Jean took the heavily loaded tray and started going up the kitchen stairs. In front of her, treading more and more slowly, more and more wheezily, walked the housekeeper. The gas-light in the hall showed the fine tessellated black and white pavement and the two mahogany doors. As they walked past the door giving into a back room on the ground floor Jean heard a choking cough.

“There ’e is, pore gentleman, coughing ’is life away,” whispered Mrs. Lightfoot compassionately. “It’ll be a mercy for me, as well as for ’im and another I could name, when ’e’s gone. But that sort lingers on and on—never knowing they’re going either.”

They went on, up the first flight, and though there was another gas-jet halfway up, the house seemed wrapped in gloom. It was, however, a magnificent remnant of London’s eighteenth-century architecture; the banisters of the wide staircase were of wrought iron, and it did not require much imagination to see the beaux and the belles of a hundred and fifty years ago walking down the wide, low steps hand in hand.

When they reached the drawing-room floor, the door of the back drawing room opened, and a cheerful chubby-looking young man’s face looked out.

“Hullo! Mrs. Heavyfoot? Got a lady-in-waiting at last, eh?” And then the speaker looked hard at the girl carrying the tray. “Here’s a pretty miss! D’you know who you remind me of, pretty miss?”

“Now, none of your nonsense!” said Mrs. Lightfoot sharply, “you an engaged gentleman too! Fie! Mr. Goodbody.”

“You remind me,” went on Mr. Goodbody, taking no notice of his landlady, “of a beauteous young female called Pamela—‘Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded.’ But I fear me you’ll have none of the wondrous adventures which befell Pamela—not while you’re under the eagle eye of your present chaperon!”

256Jean made no answer to these facetious remarks, but she looked at him so coldly that the young man felt, as he expressed it to himself, somewhat withered. Quietly he withdrew into his own quarters and shut the door.

“’E means no ’arm,” panted Mrs. Lightfoot tolerantly, “’e’s only out for a bit of fun. And yet, would you believe it? ’Is young lady, well, she ’ardly smiles! I suppose ’e’s tired her with ’is fun, that’s what ’e’s done.”

On and on they went, and then the housekeeper suddenly said: “’Ush!” In a low whisper she added: “I sees that ’er door is open. You just give me that tray, and then, when I’ve fixed ’er up comfortable, you can creep up be’ind me, and I’ll show you where you’re to sleep. Then I won’t ’ave to come up again to show you—see?”

And there on the dark staircase the girl waited—it seemed to her for a long time, while murmurs of conversation came from behind the now shut door of Miss Cheale’s sitting room. She felt extraordinarily strung up and excited at the thought that there, within a few feet of her, was the woman who claimed to have the key to the mystery of Mrs. Garlett’s death.

At last Mrs. Lightfoot came out of the brightly lit room, and beckoned to her help; and Jean, hurrying on to the landing, saw a narrow ladder-like staircase.

“No need for me to go up. You can’t make no mistake, Bet, for only one o’ the two garrets up there ’as any furniture in it. I don’t say you’ll find it very comfortable, but ’tain’t as if ’twas terrible cold just now. You can move about too, for all you’re just over Miss Cheale’s bedroom. They don’t build ’ouses like this nowadays. She’s in a rare nervy state to-night. She’s frightened of a feller that’s been ’anging about ’ere a lot—name of Kentworthy. ’E’s getting up this case for ’Enry Garlett. But ’e don’t get much change out of me—though before I knew what ’e was up to, we became quite friendly-like. Oh, ’e’s an artful one! But ’e won’t get over Jemima Lightfoot—and I told ’im so flat! Only once did ’e force ’is way into this ’ouse and that was when I wasn’t in it.”

257
CHAPTER XXIII
With a loud cry of “What is it? What’s the matter?” Jean, in the pitch darkness, sat up in her narrow pallet bed, and listened.

For a moment or two she didn’t know where she was, and fear clutched at her heart. And then, though memory soon came back, it was accompanied by icy waves of terror, and it was with a trembling hand that she lit a candle.

It was now quite still and quiet up there under the roof of the huge old house. Then, all at once, the sounds that had awakened her began again. The sound of a loud, discordant voice—or was it two voices?—that seemed terrifyingly near.

Clasping her hands together nervously, Jean listened intently. It was a high-pitched voice—only one voice after all—uttering quick, eager, argumentative words, of which she could not catch the sense.

The candle was burning more brightly now, and she looked timorously round her. Mrs. Lightfoot, with all her kind, hearty good-nature, had never bethought herself of making the bedroom of her help even a little comfortable. It was a large garret, and the ceiling was so low that it gave its occupant a feeling of being pressed down upon. The flooring boards, which were not over-clean, were bare, though by the pallet bed lay a dingy-looking string mat. A tub and minute iron washing-stand were in a corner, and a rickety yellow-painted chest of drawers stood far away, under the dormer window, and on it was the cheapest form of toilet-glass made. Jean had laughed when she had looked at herself in it, for so distorted a view of her face had never been presented to her gaze before. But now, sitting up in bed, the thought of that distorting looking-glass gave her a feeling of horror and affright.

The one chair in the room was dirty and very shaky. 258On it there now stood her light, cheap, almost empty, suitcase. There were three hooks screwed into the door, but she had put her clothes on the bed, for in spite of Mrs. Lightfoot’s remark, she had felt very cold....

All at once she realized that the voice she heard was Miss Cheale’s voice. Leaping out of bed, she caught up her outdoor jacket and put it on; then, after listening intently, she opened her door, leaving the candle alight.

For a moment the darkness baffled her. Then she felt along the wall, and at last found the cord which ran down along the side of the dangerous, ladder-like stairs. Putting one bare foot slowly, cautiously, before the other, down she went, very, very slowly, terrified lest she should make the smallest sound.

At last her feet rested on the landing out of which opened Miss Cheale’s sitting room and bedroom, and, as she stood there, the voice suddenly stopped.

Was it possible that Agatha Cheale had heard the stuffless sounds which she had made while treading with her bare feet down the wooden stairs?

Then, to her mingled fright and relief, she heard the voice begin again, speaking now loudly, now almost in a whisper.

Tip-toeing across the lobby, she crouched down outside the closed bedroom door, and there at last she heard quite clearly the words that seemed tumbling out one after another, as if the lips that uttered them could not get them out quickly enough.

And yet those words, those sentences, were punctuated with strange pauses. It was as if the speaker were taking part in an eager, sometimes embittered, argument with an unseen opponent.

“I am speaking up. I have nothing to conceal.... A tall dark man.... I think I should.... It is a broad corridor.... No, I did not think of it, I thought him a workman.... I did not know I was free to speak sooner.”

The staccato sentences were uttered with extraordinary energy. Then with a complete change of voice came the quiet words:

“I always liked Mrs. Garlett very much.... Yes, 259she was invariably most kind to me. Of course Mr. Garlett was also kind and considerate, but I saw very little of him.... I was naturally with Mrs. Garlett very much more.... Undoubtedly ... as long, that is, as Mr. and Mrs. Garlett wished me to stay. Three hundred pounds is not an exceptional salary.... No communication with Mr. Garlett.... Once, just after the war.”

Then, with sudden passion, “You have no right to say that.” There came an appeal in the voice. “My lord, am I compelled to answer that question?... They were forced strawberries given by a lady who will, if necessary, confirm what I say ... Miss Prince, my lord.”

And then at last, as if telling a story, and in a much more composed, quiet voice, Agatha Cheale continued:

“I put the strawberries on one side, partly because I had before me the disagreeable task of giving notice to a servant. I forgot about the strawberries till early afternoon. I then put them on a Chinese dessert dish, and took them upstairs myself. I placed them on a chest of drawers outside Mrs. Garlett’s room——”

Then came a long pause. Jean’s heart was beating—beating.

“Yes, I will swear they were gone when I saw the man I took to be a workman in the corridor. I thought no more of them till Mrs. Garlett first summoned me in the night.... Mrs. Garlett did not say they had been given her by her husband. I will swear to that.... I’m quite aware that everything I’m now saying is being said on oath.... She said, ‘The strawberries upset me. I ought not to have taken them.’ She had had several visitors that afternoon.... I cannot remember who they were. She was very fond of seeing people when fairly well.”

In a low hesitating voice came the words: “Must I go into details of Mr. Garlett’s sojourn in the war hospital, my lord?”... Then with a kind of cry—“He always behaved like a gentleman to me!”

There followed what seemed to the listener a very long silence, and Jean was just turning away to go upstairs, when again Agatha Cheale began speaking in an excited, defiant voice.

“Certainly not! This is the very first time I have ever 260seen an anonymous letter.... I am looking at it. I entirely deny that.... I can’t help what any expert says.... I don’t want to look at it again.... I did not know Miss Bower—she was never at the Thatched House that I know of.”

And then there followed complete silence, broken now and then by a moan from the sleeping woman on the other side of the door.

The eavesdropper stood up. She walked slowly across the landing, and made her way, hardly breathing, up the narrow stairway.

What did all that confused, broken talk portend? She tried to piece the sentences together to make sense of them, but the whole formed a hopeless jumble in her weary brain, and when she reached her comfortless bedchamber she poured a small dose of sleeping draught into a medicine glass, and, lying down, soon fell into a troubled sleep.

At six o’clock her alarm rang out. She jumped out of bed and went over to the bathtub. Oh, how cold the water was and how cold she felt with this sorry substitute for the comfortable bathroom at Bonnie Doon! But a good rub with a rough towel made her feel a good deal warmer. She dressed quickly and went downstairs, feeling her way till she reached the hall. There was a thin line of light under the invalid lodger’s door, and as she passed it Jean heard his stifled, painful cough.

Going into the kitchen, she laid and lit the fire. Then, acting on impulse, at seven she boiled a little water and took Mrs. Lightfoot a cup of nice hot tea.

“Well, child, this is very kindly of you, and no mistake! You’re the first of my ’elps that ’as hever done such a thing as bring me a cup o’ tea afore I got up in the morning. But there—you’ll not suffer from being kind. You shall ’ave two eggs instead of the one I meant you to ’ave for your breakfast. No Chinese eggs for me! Good English new-laid, that’s all I has any use for. Now, you start getting ready the breakfasts. Hall ’ave to be early stirrers and early risers in this ’ouse—hall but Miss Cheale, that is. She’s not expected to be down at ’er place till near eleven.”

For the next hour Jean was kept very busy, doing the kitchen and helping with the breakfast. At last she took 261up Mr. Robins’s breakfast tray, while Mrs. Lightfoot took up Mr. Goodbody’s.

As for the mysterious gentleman who occupied the back room on the ground floor, he had a specially big breakfast—a quarter of a pound of the best butter all to himself. Jean remembered the words: “’E’s paid for separately because ’e’s an hinvalid. You’ll ’ave nothing to do with ’im,” and sure enough in that one case Mrs. Lightfoot did not ask her to help in any way, save to carry the heavy tray to the top of the kitchen staircase.

Then, at last, the two sat down together to their breakfast, and after a few moments Mrs. Lightfoot suddenly observed: “Did Miss Cheale gabble a bit in ’er sleep last night?”

“Yes,” said Jean in a low voice, “she did.”

“There now! But you’ll soon get used to it. The minute she drops off, she is in the witness-box, poor soul! That’s what’s unsettling of ’er, though she do believe she’ll get that villain, Garlett, off.”

Jean started so violently that the other noticed it.

“What’s the matter with you? Got a pain?”

“Just a little pain,” said Jean, trying to smile.

“You’ll get used to the stairs hafter a day or two. Just pour yourself hout another cup of tea and start your second hegg—that’ll make you feel better.”

“I don’t think I want another egg,” said Jean.

“Nonsense!” said Mrs. Lightfoot severely. “The hegg’s been cooked, and you’ve got to eat it. I won’t ’ave any waste in this ’ouse.”

“Does Miss Cheale really think she’ll get Mr. Garlett off?”

“She do, indeed! She thinks she saw the murderer—a strange-looking chap ’e was—in the ’ouse that very hafternoon.”

Mrs. Lightfoot leaned forward. “But it’s my belief, Bet, that she’s just made that up! If so, they’ll soon find it hout. She’ll never save ’im, bless you! She don’t know as much as I do about murder.”

Mrs. Lightfoot smiled a broad cheerful smile. “My poor ’usban’ used ter say: ‘’Ow you can care to read about them ’orrible occurrences passes me, Jemima.’ But I’ve made a special study of ’em from childhood.”

“But if she thinks she can prove he’s innocent,” asked 262Jean in a trembling voice, “why doesn’t she do it now? Why wait for the trial?”

“Now you’re askin’!” exclaimed Mrs. Lightfoot. “But I’ll answer your question truly. Miss Cheale”—she fixed her eyes on Jean’s pale face—“Miss Cheale,” she repeated, “wants that man Garlett to know she’s saved ’im. Then she thinks ’e’ll give up that girl Bower—and maybe marry ’er.”

“Marry her?” repeated Jean. “How d’you mean?”

“Miss Cheale,” said Mrs. Lightfoot, “is sweet on that villain ’erself. That’s been plain to me for a long time. If not, why take on so? She saved the man’s arm, ’cordin’ to ’er account, when she was a nurse in France, and now she means to save ’is life. She’s a deep one!”

“Then she says she saw a stranger in the Thatched House?” asked Jean. She was beginning to understand much that had seemed oddly mysterious last night.

“That’s what she’s going to say, at any rate. One thing I will tell you, Bet Chart. She do honestly believe Garlett didn’t do it. She said so again to me last night. Funny, wasn’t it? She says to me: ‘They say they’ve found the place where Mr. Garlett bought the poison. ’E never did buy any poison.’”

“You mean the thing that appeared in The Sunday Critic?” said the girl.

“Yes, that’s what I do mean—but ’owever did you know it?”

“I saw the paper. A friend I stayed with the night before I came here bought it, and showed me the paragraph.”

Night and day the hidden drama went on—with the vast, dark, melancholy old house as background.

From the moment she went up to bed Jean Bower became intensely herself—that is, the unhappy, agonizingly anxious girl who was engaged to a man whom the whole world regarded as a murderer.

And then, sometimes earlier, sometimes later, she would be awakened by the now familiar sounds of Agatha Cheale talking in her sleep, and, after a short battle with herself, she would creep down to the floor below and listen to the unseen speaker rehearsing the evidence she meant to give 263when in the witness-box at Harry Garlett’s trial for his life.

But what to the secret listener was so strange, as well as bitterly disappointing, was that Agatha Cheale’s monologue scarcely altered at all, from night to night. The suggestions, assertions, indignant denials and admissions, would be repeated again and again, in almost exactly the same form of words. Indeed, as night followed night, there came a maddening monotony about Jean Bower’s furtive eavesdropping expeditions down to the dark landing.

Lying awake after she had again crept into her bed, Jean would ask herself if there was any truth in the suggestion that a stranger had broken his way into the Thatched House on that fatal Saturday afternoon? And always she had to agree with shrewd Mrs. Lightfoot that there had been no stranger there. He was an invention, and a poor invention at that, of Agatha Cheale.

From seven each morning Jean Bower turned into Bet Chart, “help” to the good-natured, talkative, monstrously fat woman of whom the poor girl found herself getting fond, in a sort of way.

Now and again the “help” would hide herself behind the door of the empty front room on the ground floor to see the young lady who was the subject of so much interest and speculation to every one in the house, pass through the gloomy hall.

Agatha Cheale was exceptionally well dressed, generally in a well-cut blue serge coat and skirt, a handsome fur tippet, and a smart little toque on her dark hair. She had always been pale, and now her face looked absolutely bloodless. There were deep, dark rings under her eyes—those eyes which were the only beautiful feature of her thin, strong face.

Late each morning Bet Chart tidied Miss Cheale’s sitting room, and “did” her bedroom; and when quite sure that Mrs. Lightfoot would not make an unexpected appearance, she would ashamedly open the drawers in the ramshackle dressing-table, and try the lid of the shabby old dispatch box which stood close to Miss Cheale’s bed. But the box had a patent lock, and its owner wore the key night and day, according to Mrs. Lightfoot.

264As to the sitting room, it was bare and comfortless. On the big, plain writing table stood a typewriter, and to its right a wad of blotting paper, and a box of good notepaper and envelopes to match. A bookcase full of books did something to humanize the room. But Miss Cheale only used the room as a place in which to have her tray meals, and when she received her infrequent visitors.

And then, just nine days before what was to be the opening day of Harry Garlett’s trial, Jean Bower did obtain conclusive evidence concerning the authorship of the anonymous letters which had first started the investigation.

She had finished dusting Miss Cheale’s tidy, bare, little sitting room when some sudden instinct made her do what she had never done before. She moved, that is, the heavy typewriter which stood on the writing-table.

Under the board on which it stood lay a thin, fancy-paper covered blotting book. She opened it, to find between its leaves some sheets of thin, foreign-looking paper....

Shaking with excitement and suspense, she took up the top sheet and held it up between her eyes and the window. Then, still with the sheet of paper in her hand, she rushed up the ladder-like staircase, turned into her large bare garret, opened the attaché case where she kept a few things under lock and key, and took out the facsimile of the first of the anonymous letters which had been given to her by James Kentworthy.

Yes, there could be no doubt about it, the watermarks were the same.

She sank down on her bed, dizzy with conflicting feelings. Then Lucy Warren had been right in her reluctantly expressed suspicion! It was now certain that Agatha Cheale had written the anonymous letters which had ultimately caused Harry Garlett’s arrest on the awful charge of poisoning his wife, and with a feeling of mingled excitement, horror, and triumph, Jean Bower faced what seemed to her the certainty of Agatha Cheale’s guilt.

As she came back into the kitchen Mrs. Lightfoot looked up.

“Why, child, you do look bad!” she exclaimed. “I was going to ask you to go hout and get a quarter of a pound of butter, but I declare I’ll do it myself! I don’t want you laid up!”

265She put her podgy hand on the girl’s shoulder, and Jean burst into tears and began to sob bitterly, “I’m all right,” she said.

At eight o’clock Jean summoned up courage to ask leave to go out. She felt she must see Sir Harold Anstey to-night. Considering the importance of what she had to tell him, to show him, he could not object to her going to his private address; a flat in Park Lane.

“I want to go out this evening on some urgent business. I hope you won’t mind, Mrs. Lightfoot? Would you lend me a latchkey?”

Mrs. Lightfoot looked consideringly at the girl.

“Well,” she grumbled, “I don’t suppose I shall say ‘no,’ though ’tain’t, by rights, your hevening hout. But there! Yes, Bet, you can go.”

It was nine o’clock, and Sir Harold Anstey had just finished dinner. He had had an excellent meal and was enjoying a good cigar. But he was in a very bad temper—a rare state for him to be in—but a lady had been going to dine with Sir Harold to-night, and at the very last moment she had “chucked” him. He felt furious; also, what he was not wont to feel: jealous.

The telephone bell rang in the pantry and Sir Harold leapt up from his chair.

“A lady, Sir Harold, on the ’phone. She asked if you were alone. She wouldn’t give her name. She said she’d like to come along and see you for a little while, if you were alone, and not too busy.”

“Say I shall be delighted to see her. And Gunn! I’ll open the front door myself.”

Dear little woman! Her excuse that she had had to go and see a sick friend had evidently been a true one.

But even to his impatient heart, the sharp electric ring came surprisingly soon.

He hurried into his hall. But when he opened the door, instead of the beautiful woman he expected to see, a slight, shabbily dressed girl stood before him.

“This is number eight,” he said shortly. “You have made a mistake in the floor.”

266“No, I haven’t, Sir Harold. I’m Jean Bower. I telephoned and asked if you were alone.”

“Miss Bower? So it was you who telephoned? Come in, by all means.”

Though he tried to speak pleasantly, there was a marked lack of cordiality in his voice.

“As a matter of fact I am very busy this evening,” he went on, “but of course, if you’ve anything important to say, I will see you now for a few minutes, rather than to-morrow morning in my chambers.”

But as he ushered her into the sitting room, the lawyer reasserted himself, and the mere man disappeared.

“And now, Miss Bower, what can I do for you?”

“I’ve found out that Agatha Cheale wrote those anonymous letters. I think you will agree that this piece of paper provides the proof.”

Sir Harold scrutinized closely the watermark which had been so carefully drawn in on the facsimile of the first anonymous letter. Then he held the thin piece of foreign paper up to the lamp.

“Yes—there’s no doubt about it,” he said decisively.

Jean looked at him anxiously. She had felt so absolutely sure that he would be overjoyed at her discovery. Instead of that there was a grim, almost an angry, expression on his broad face.

“I fear that I am going to give you a shock, Miss Bower. The whole situation has been changed most seriously to our detriment by the fact that arsenic has been found in a house actually belonging to Mr. Garlett.”

As she was about to break in he put up his hand:

“Let me have my say out, please—and then I will listen to whatever you may have to say. I have something to tell you concerning this woman, Agatha Cheale. She lately communicated to the Prosecution a sworn statement that she saw a stranger in the Thatched House on the afternoon of Mrs. Garlett’s death. She further says she saw him close to Mrs. Garlett’s bedroom door. The prosecution do not believe this story, and neither does our side.”

“Yet it may be true!” exclaimed Jean desperately.

The great advocate went on as if he had not heard her:

“Now my theory is this: First, this woman, Agatha 267Cheale, was undoubtedly in love with Garlett; and she considered herself very much aggrieved when she learned of the man’s forthcoming marriage to yourself.”

He saw Jean’s face change, become discomposed, and, speaking a little less harshly, he went on:

“Come, come, you mustn’t mind hearing the truth! I take it you would rather know the truth?”

She bent her head.

“Secondly, to me, and also, I may add, to my brethren of the law on the other side, it soon became practically certain that Miss Cheale had written the anonymous letters, so what you have brought me to-night simply confirms our view. Now, Miss Cheale, to the best of my belief”—he looked at her significantly—“did this out of what I must call, saving your presence, feminine spite. I am quite sure she had no idea that Mrs. Garlett had met with anything but a natural death. What she wished to do was to give Henry Garlett, and no doubt yourself, too, a very unpleasant quarter of an hour. If this theory is correct, the result of the exhumation astounded her and caused her to realize that, thanks to her spiteful action, the man to whom she seems to be still devoted is in great peril of his life. This is why she has hit on the absurd, though in such cases common, invention of a mysterious stranger.”

He stopped speaking, and in a strangled voice Jean exclaimed:

“So what I’ve brought you to-night is not of the slightest help, Sir Harold?”

“I don’t say that! I’m glad you brought the proof to me and not to the other side, for, of course, anything that tends to discredit Miss Cheale discredits her mysterious stranger. But I should not be a true friend, I should be a cruel friend”—and now his voice did take on a far more kindly quality—“were I to conceal from you, Miss Bower, that Henry Garlett is in the very gravest danger. Till the admission made by Miss Prince——”

Jean made a quick movement of surprise.

“Yes, Miss Prince has at last brought herself to admit that there was actually a considerable amount of arsenic kept by her, carelessly, in an open cupboard at the Thatched Cottage. You are, of course, aware that there was one all-important 268missing link in the chain of circumstantial evidence connecting Henry Garlett with the death of his wife? That link has now, I regret to say, been supplied.”

As he saw the look of agony, of despair, on her young face he hastened on:

“I do not mean by all I have said, Miss Bower, that you are to give up hope. On the contrary, if you can persuade the jury that Garlett had not fallen in love with you before his wife’s death, you will have gone a very long way to destroy what, of course, the other side are relying on—Garlett’s motive for committing this murder—if murder there was.”

“If murder there was?” repeated Jean uncertainly.

“Yes, for I am going most seriously into the question whether or not Mrs. Garlett committed suicide. A large quantity of white arsenic has been in Miss Prince’s possession for many years. At one time, when in better health, Mrs. Garlett was constantly at the Thatched Cottage. I have found a woman who will tell the Court that Mrs. Garlett had an extraordinary horror of vermin—of rats and of mice—and I am going to raise the question as to whether some years ago she did not persuade Miss Prince to give her a small quantity of arsenic to destroy some rats which she believed were infesting a portion of the Thatched House. In that case Mrs. Garlett may well have kept some of the arsenic by her, and, in a moment of depression or of pain, administered it to herself.”

But even Sir Harold’s assured voice became less assured as he put forward this unlikely theory.

He concluded after a short pause:

“The thing for you to do is to keep yourself as fit as possible during the days that are now going to elapse before the trial. Remember that everything may depend on your making a good and, as I believe, an honest impression on the jury.”

269
CHAPTER XXIV
Jean walked the whole way back to Coburg Square. She was numb, spent with misery. For the first time hope, that illusive yet infinitely comforting and uplifting companion, had left her side, and she felt to-night as if he had never been there. The knowledge that she had failed to secure anything that really mattered by what now seemed to her an absurd and inglorious adventure added to the load of misery and discouragement she was now carrying.

She made up her mind to go back to Terriford early to-morrow morning, as the need for make-believe was past.

It was nearly eleven o’clock when she reached the deserted square. Quietly she turned the old-fashioned latchkey in the big box lock. The hall was in darkness, but under the ailing lodger’s door ran a thin streak of light. Did the poor man never go to sleep?

She felt her way down the kitchen stairs, and turning into the kitchen, lit the gas.

She felt extraordinarily wide awake, and yet tired, tired to death! The thought of going up to the cold bedroom where she had spent such excited hours of hope, suspense, and, to-day, of triumphant satisfaction, filled her with a feeling of sick depression. Suddenly she told herself that she would stay down here, in this warm, comfortable kitchen all night. Mrs. Lightfoot would never find it out, and if she did—what matter?

She made up the fire quietly. With luck there would still be a remnant of warmth when she awoke to-morrow morning at half-past six. She knelt down, but she found she could not say the simple, trusting prayers she had said from childhood, for she felt that God had forsaken her.

She got up, and by the light of the fire she pushed forward the black horsehair-covered armchair in which Mrs. Lightfoot generally sat of an evening. Then she put her own chair in front of it, and lay down.

270Tap ... Tap ... Tap....

Jean awoke with a clutch of fear at her heart. Was that the death watch of which her old nurse had once told her?

She sat up on her improvised couch, and again there came that strange sound repeated three times. But now, being thoroughly awake, she knew them at once for what they were—a signal, a summons, from the invalid lodger who lived in the back room on the ground floor of the house.

Jean did not wait to strike a match, but went quickly to the door. She was unwilling to be caught here, downstairs, by Mrs. Lightfoot, so she walked on tiptoe past the housekeeper’s bedroom, and then she ran lightly up the kitchen stairs and knocked on the sick lodger’s door.

“Come in!” called out a clear, well-modulated voice.

She opened the door on a strange and, to her, a most unexpected sight.

The high, well-proportioned eighteenth-century room was well and even luxuriously furnished. Green damask curtains were drawn across the two windows. On the thick felt carpet which covered the floor, stood a mahogany chest of drawers and, facing the door, a high modern bedstead. By the bed was a table bearing a reading lamp, which, though shaded, lit up the finely shaped head and thin, bony face of the man lying in the bed. His head was covered with a thick thatch of fair hair, and he was propped up on three or four pillows placed at his back.

To Jean’s pitying eyes he appeared to be dying.

And as she stood there, still close to the door outside the circle of light cast by the lamp, she gradually took in other, minor, details. There was a pile of books on the table, and on the blue silk eiderdown a small volume was open, face downward.

“Mrs. Lightfoot?” said the invalid in a doubtful tone. “I’m ashamed of having had to rouse you, but I feel much less well to-night, also parched with thirst.”

Jean took a few steps forward. “I’m Mrs. Lightfoot’s ‘help.’ And as Mrs. Lightfoot is asleep I thought it better to come up.”

An amazing change came over the pallid face—it was suddenly animated with keen curiosity and cynical amusement.

271“Bet Chart?” he exclaimed. “And most perfect of Hebes, according to good old Lightfoot. Come hither, fair maid——”

Jean moved back rather than forward.

“What can I do for you?” she said quietly. “If you will tell me what it is you wanted Mrs. Lightfoot for—I will do it.”

He raised himself painfully on his right elbow and gave her a long, measuring, penetrating look.

“Come nearer,” he said in an authoritative voice. “You’ve nothing to be afraid of from the poor dying wretch I am now——”

She came close up to the bed; and then, looking up at her, he said in a very different tone: “Your name is not Bet Chart; you are Miss Jean Bower, of Terriford village.”

She clasped her hands together.

“It’s true!” she cried, oppressed, bewildered. “But for God’s sake don’t give me away to Mrs. Lightfoot——”

“Of course I won’t. And now tell me how is it that Dr. Maclean’s niece comes to be here, in 106, Coburg Square?” And his sunken eyes were alive with a mocking, mischievous curiosity.

Instead of answering his question, she said again, “What can I do for you?”

And then, noticing that behind the pile of books was an empty glass, “D’you want something to drink?”

“I did—horribly. But now I’m no longer thirsty—or, rather, I’m only thirsty for information.”

It was amazing to see how he had changed in the last few minutes, and yet the long outlines of his body under the eiderdown looked like those of a skeleton.

Jean Bower looked round.

“The milk and soda water are over there—quite out of my reach. You may have already observed that Mrs. Lightfoot has nothing in common with Florence Nightingale.”

She turned and saw that on the chest of drawers there stood a siphon and a jug of milk. She went over and brought them both back with her.

“D’you remember the scrumptious refreshments at that cricket match, Miss Bower?”

She looked down into his pallid, smiling face, and as she 272met the direct glance of his heavy-lidded gray eyes, there came over Jean Bower a strong feeling that she had seen him before.

“Can’t you guess who I am?”

She shook her head. “I have no idea who you are! Mrs. Lightfoot has never mentioned your name.”

Then he said, in a singular tone: “Why should I make a foolish mystery of it? My name is Guy Cheale. I am Agatha’s brother. But she hates illness, and as it makes her wretched to see me in this state—well, we don’t often meet. It’s my fault I haven’t a nurse.”

And then all at once his hand shot out—his bony left hand—and took hold of her dress.

“I know now why you’re here,” he exclaimed. “How stupid of me not to guess it! You’ve come to spy on Agatha. But, believe me, Miss Bower, you’re on the wrong track. You’re not going to help your friend that way.”

“I know that now,” she whispered.

“There’s nothing to find out about Agatha—nothing that will help you, at any rate. I suppose you know that she and Garlett were once great friends?”

“That’s not true,” she said the words with passionate conviction.

“Not true?” he repeated. “Absolutely true! But one thing I’ll grant you. Agatha was the one who cared. He didn’t care—not even in the war hospital when he was so lonely. But she thought he did!”

As if speaking to himself, he added: “And I thought so, too. I used to think that if anything happened to his wife, to use the conventional paraphrase for death—sweet, delicate death—he would marry Agatha.”

Jean stared down at him. She was torn with conflicting feelings in which repulsion and anger for the moment predominated.

“I’m afraid you are very unhappy,” he said suddenly.

She whispered, “Very unhappy,” and yet, though what he had said about his sister and Harry Garlett both disturbed and offended her, it was an astonishing relief to find herself with some one with whom she could be herself.

“Bring up that chair,” he said in a low voice, “and let us talk it over.”

273She brought the chair close to the bed.

“Ask yourself what use was Mrs. Garlett’s life even to herself, and imagine, for the purposes of our argument, that your worthy rector, Mr. Cole-Wright, having in him a secret strain of what some people call madness, but what I should term supernormal sense, told himself that it would be a duty—I will not say a pleasure, but a duty—to send this poor woman to the heaven in which both he and she absolutely believe. Is that an utterly unreasonable supposition?”

“Yes,” said Jean, in a low voice, “utterly unreasonable.”

A sensation of mingled excitement, pain and indignation filled her heart. She felt she was doing wrong in staying with this strange, sinister, cruel-natured man a moment longer than was absolutely necessary. Yet he exercised a certain fascination over her, and again she felt what a real relief it was to be talking to some one with whom she need not pretend.

“Don’t be hurt, Miss Jean, at my teasing you—for of course I am teasing you! I quite realize that in our present state of civilization the putting away of a human being is a serious thing—and not to be encouraged. Doctors alone are licensed by public opinion, as well as by decrees passed by themselves, to commit what other people call murder.”

She remained silent, and after a long pause, during which his eyes seemed to hold hers in fee, he asked abruptly:

“When is Harry Garlett’s trial coming on?”

“In nine days.”

“That’s very near,” he muttered, “nearer than I thought. Are you dreading the witness-box? My sister is horribly afraid of it—I know that much about her.”

She made no answer to that, and he muttered: “Poor little girl—poor, pretty little girl. Too bad! Too bad!”

And again Jean Bower felt sure they had met—nay, even more, that he had uttered pitying, familiar words to her before. But as to when and where, memory supplied no clue.

Guy Cheale lay back on his pillows. He closed his eyes, and Jean felt a pang of sick fear. Ought she to call his sister and Mrs. Lightfoot?

Suddenly he opened his eyes. “Your guardian angel surely brought you here to-night.”

274“Why?” she asked.

“In order that I might cheer you up by telling you that Harry Garlett is sure to be acquitted, to be given, as it were, the benefit of the doubt.”

“What makes you say that?” asked Jean in a trembling tone.

She was sobbing now, bitterly. He leaned over with difficulty and took her soft right hand in his bony fingers.

“Not,” he exclaimed, “because I believe in British justice—far from it—but there’s just one little fact that will save him.”

She looked at him, all her soul now in her eager eyes.

“What fact?” she asked.

“The fact,” he said deliberately, “that no arsenic has been traced to Garlett’s possession. Practically all the resources of the Crown have been used to find where he procured the arsenic—and they have failed.”

“They have not failed,” said Jean quietly, “in finding where Harry could have procured arsenic. I saw Sir Harold Anstey this evening. He told me that Miss Prince, who is a doctor’s daughter and lives close to the Thatched House, has now admitted that she kept quite a lot of arsenic in her medicine cupboard. Miss Prince is Harry’s tenant——”

The sick man dropped her hand and stared at her in dismay.

“My God!” he muttered. “That is a bit of rough luck.”

“I’m going home to-morrow,” Jean went on drearily. “There’s nothing left for me to do here. I’m sorry to be going so—so abruptly, because Mrs. Lightfoot has been very kind to me.”

“Yes, she’s a good old soul.”

He lay back and again shut his eyes. His face had gone very gray. For a moment neither of them spoke. Then he opened his eyes wide again.

“D’you know Lucy Warren?” he asked in a singular tone.

And suddenly Jean remembered the talk there had been concerning poor Lucy and the strange man who lay there dying before her, his body disintegrating, while his mind, his intellect, remained so sound and clear.

The colour rushed into her face.

“Yes, I know her quite well.”

275“Lucy’s a good girl,” he said thoughtfully, and then, “I didn’t behave well to Lucy, Miss Bower.”

“I’m afraid you didn’t.”

“Did she tell you so?” he asked.

“Lucy has never mentioned you to me. I don’t believe she’s ever spoken of you to anybody.”

“I want you to do something for me,” there was a touch of urgency in his voice. “It’s to take down a message for Lucy at my dictation, and then, in the morning, to telegraph it to her. You will find some money over there in a drawer. I’d write it myself, but I’m too weak.”

There came a spot of colour into his cheeks.

“There’s a paper and pencil near where the siphon stood just now. I used to write notes to my sister, but I can no longer manage it.”

Jean brought what he asked for, and then he dictated, scarce hesitating for a word:

Miss Lucy Warren, The Thatched Cottage, Terriford, Grendon. This conveys an offer of marriage from one who is your devout lover. I am dying, and I want you. Lose not an hour. Come at once to 106, Coburg Square, London.—Guy Cheale.

“It’s a matter of supreme indifference to me that the postmistress of that gossiping little place should know the truth, and the doctor who looks after me here is a good chap. He’ll arrange about getting the ring, parson, bell, and book.”

As she looked at him, dazed, he said with a slight smile:

“Death-bed marriages are not as unusual as you may happen to think them, Miss Bower. And if there were more such marriages, there would be fewer unhappy wives.”

She smiled wanly, and in the midst of her own wretchedness, felt glad that Lucy would have her heart’s wish.

“They were more merciful in the old days,” muttered Guy Cheale. “In the days of the rack and the stake, any poor wretch in prison for murder could marry his sweetheart. You’re sorry that’s not the case now, eh, Miss Jean?”

“Yes,” said Jean, looking down at him. “I am very sorry that that’s not the case now.”

“Still there are various forms of prison, you know? I’m in prison here—very much in prison, if I may say so. Oh, how I’ve got to loathe the look of this room—for all poor 276Agatha tried to make it comfortable for me! I little thought when I first arrived here—only six weeks ago, Miss Bower—that it would become my marriage room. But in life—now don’t forget this, for it’s the last thing I shall say to you—in life it’s the strange, the unexpected, the astounding thing that as often as not happens——”

“That’s true,” she said heavily.

“I’ve got an idea—a good idea, too! I’ll be your mediator with the outraged Lightfoot. I’ll tell her you had to go away—that it was really urgent. And then I’ll break to her that a new help is coming—a good worker, too, much more experienced than poor little Bet Chart is ever likely to be. A tall, dark, magnificent-looking girl, with a will of her own, mind you. So then Lucy will be sure, I won’t say of a welcome—but of a greeting.”

She leaned down and began to shake up his pillows.

“Give Mrs. Lightfoot her cup of tea before you steal away,” he said.

And as he caught a look of surprise in her face:

“Mrs. Lightfoot is my only friend. If it wasn’t that she is such a good, kindly-natured human creature, God knows what I should have done with myself. Well, good-bye, good luck, and thank you for what you’re going to do for me. You won’t be sorry, Miss Bower, that you’ve obliged a dying man.”

“Sorry?” she said. “No, indeed, Mr. Cheale, I shall always be very glad we’ve had this talk.”

“I hope I shall,” he said doubtfully, and helplessly began to cough.

She stood quietly by his side till the painful paroxysm was over, and then:

“Good-bye,” she said, torn between a feeling of intense pity and almost equally intense repulsion.

“Good luck!” he exclaimed. “And remember that in this country we are taught to believe that no innocent man is ever wrongly convicted.”

A queer, mocking smile came over his face, and then once more he began to cough, and again she waited, till the painful sounds ceased.

After giving Mrs. Lightfoot a cup of tea, she wrote a note of what she felt to be lame apology, and, leaving it on the 277kitchen table, crept out and went to the nearest post office.

The young woman who accepted the strangely worded telegram for transmission looked very hard at Jean Bower:

“This a practical joke, or what?” she asked suspiciously.

Jean answered soberly: “No, it’s not a joke. It’s exactly what it pretends to be—an offer of marriage from a dying man.”

“Some girls seem to have all the luck! Forty-one words.”

Jean was so tired that she slept away the journey which would otherwise have been so full of disappointed, bitter thoughts, and she felt as if she had been away months instead of days when she came out into the big station yard of Grendon, and saw her Uncle Jock’s familiar two-seater with him at the wheel waiting for her. He had not come on to the platform to greet her, and for that she was grateful, for she was shrinkingly aware that there were prying eyes and listening ears everywhere—everywhere, that is, where she was recognized as the heroine of “The Terriford Mystery.”

Dr. Maclean said very little while he drove his niece to Bonnie Doon. It was not till after she had taken off her things and come downstairs, feeling so strange, so little at home there, that it seemed almost impossible to believe she had been so short a time away, that her aunt suddenly asked: “I suppose Kentworthy has told you about Miss Prince?”

Jean answered slowly: “I’ve seen Sir Harold Anstey, and he told me.”

“She came and told me, of all people in the world,” said the doctor ruefully. “Let me see—it must have been two days before you went away. It gave me an awful shock. I could think of nothing else, and yet of course I was bound, professionally, to keep the fact to myself.”

He hit the table with his hand. “I have always disliked that woman!” He turned to his wife. “You can bear me out in that, Jenny, eh?”

“Ay,” she said, “and sometimes I did not think you were quite reasonable about it, Jock. But now I see how right you were. Miss Prince must have had enough poison in that medicine cupboard of hers to have killed every man, woman, and child in the place!”

And then Jean suddenly got up.

278“I think I would like to go a walk by myself,” she said. “I didn’t get half walking enough while I was in London.”

After she had shut the door behind her, husband and wife looked at one another.

“I can’t but be glad that she doesn’t yet realize that Garlett’s as good as hanged already,” said the doctor sombrely.

“I think she does realize it,” said Mrs. Maclean pitifully. “You weren’t watching her face while we spoke of Miss Prince. Fancy her having got into touch with Sir Harold Anstey!”

“That was a bit of a surprise to me,” admitted the doctor. “But not all the Ansteys in the world could get off yon man Garlett now.”

279
EPILOGUE
I
It is a cold windy March morning. The trial of Henry Garlett has been fixed for ten o’clock, but since before eight o’clock there has been a crowd, growing larger and larger every minute, round the stately pillared portico of the Grendon Assize Court. The crowd has been compelled to spread out fan-fashion, owing to the stout walls which stretch on either side of the building, and women form by far the larger proportion of those who are determined to obtain places in the public galleries and in those seats, behind the jury, reserved for certain privileged persons.

These would-be spectators of Henry Garlett’s ordeal, and of Jean Bower’s agony, belong to all classes, and are of all ages. Some of the women there have walked ten miles and more, this morning, to be present at the trial of the man who a short six months ago was the most popular figure in the whole countryside.

Motor cars of every make and of every type are drawn up on the edge of the ever-growing crowd. Many of these motors are filled with well-dressed women, who have come provided with opera glasses. They have sent their servants to keep places in the queues which are already pressing round each of the three big doors. But soon it becomes known that the police will not allow this convenient plan, and to their disgust the ladies have to step out of their comfortable cars, and stand cheek by jowl with their humbler fellow women.

The great majority of the people who are waiting there on this cold morning have brought some form of food with them, for they mean to keep in their places all day, so as not to lose even the smallest thrill connected with what is indifferently called the Garlett Case and the Terriford Mystery.

It is known that there will be four important witnesses—Garlett 280himself, the famous amateur cricketer; Jean Bower, for whose sake, in the opinion of the vast majority of those who will be present at the trial, he committed a dastardly and cruel murder; Miss Prince, the spinster whose tardily tendered evidence is said to be of vital importance, though no one as yet knows of what that evidence consists; and last, though not least, Agatha Cheale, the mystery woman of the strange story.

Most of the men who have come, some of them very long distances, on cycles, in motors, in old-fashioned horse-drawn vehicles, and on their own feet, are looking forward to seeing Dr. Maclean in the box. Few of those in that ever-growing crowd but have come across the kindly Scots doctor, either as his patients themselves, or because of the illness of some one dear to them. But that makes no difference to their eager wish to see him cross-examined—heckled, as it would be called in his own country—by the celebrated Sir Harold Anstey.

At half-past nine the doors are thrown open to the public and the struggle for places begins. There are some ugly rushes, with much pushing, kicking, and even pinching and scratching, before the public galleries of the Court, which is exceptionally large for a country Assize Court, are filled to their utmost capacity.

The reserved seats are few, and they, too, are soon almost unpleasantly crowded with a number of pretty, well-dressed women, some with attendant squires to whom they are talking, while they glance with keen, curiosity-laden eyes at the unfamiliar scene.

In the well of the Court already the solicitors’ clerks are busy at wide tables; the long bench which will soon be occupied by the witnesses is empty; and so is the railed-in dock, where the prisoner will soon be standing, exactly opposite the high, throne-like seat from which the judge, the keen and redoubtable Mr. Justice Freshwater, will direct the proceedings. It is known that this old-fashioned judge does not approve of ladies being present at murder trials, and accordingly the seats to his right and left will be occupied by his men friends and not by their wives.

The minutes go by fairly quickly for most of the people there, for almost everybody is talking to his or her neighbour. 281Also there is the excitement of watching the various parties connected with the case come slowly in.

The first of the witnesses to arrive are Dr. Maclean and his niece, and a stir runs through the Court as they come in. Every eye is fixed on Dr. Maclean’s slight companion. Jean Bower is quietly dressed in a black coat and skirt, and a simple little hat with a touch of blue in it. She looks absolutely self-possessed, though very pale.

Somehow the sight of her irritates some of the spectators; they had expected a tragic figure, wrapped, maybe, in long, concealing veils; they tell each other disappointedly that she looks a very ordinary young woman. True, she is curiously pale, but then perhaps she is naturally pale.

There come in various other witnesses of no particular interest, or at least not yet of any particular interest. Then, all at once there appear, walking side by side, a young and an old lady. Again a stir runs through the court.

“That’s Miss Prince,” some one says in a loud excited voice.

Miss Prince hears the words, and draws herself up somewhat haughtily. She is wearing a coat and skirt, and a plain, unbecoming round felt hat. The young lady with Miss Prince is dressed more in accordance with the popular idea of a female witness. She is heavily veiled—and looks indeed almost like a mourner at a funeral. The word is passed round that this is no other than Agatha Cheale.

She and Miss Prince walk past the other witnesses with averted eyes, and sit at the extreme end of the long bench.

Ten o’clock strikes, and now comes the moment when the judge, who embodies the majesty, the terror, the splendour of British justice, walks with slow, rhythmic steps to his place. He is a tall man, and shows off his red robes, deep ermine bands, and full-bottomed wig to great advantage. He sits himself down, gives one long stern glance round the crowded, now silent Court, and then he bends his head and busies himself with the notes and other documents laid on the high desk before him.

Now the legal lights concerned with the case begin to stream in. Sir Harold Anstey, bustling, smiling, his great frame well set off by his long black silk gown. His wig always looks just a little too small for his huge head, but still 282there is something very impressive about his strongly marked features and his keen eyes.

A great contrast, indeed almost a ludicrous contrast, is Sir Almeric Post, the leading counsel for the Crown. Sir Almeric is a thin man, and his wig looks too big for his head. He has a hatchet-shaped face, narrow, compressed lips, a straight nose, and two cold, thoughtful-looking gray eyes. Unlike Sir Harold, who is keenly aware of his audience, Sir Almeric does not even glance round the Court, but at once engages in an earnest discussion with one of his juniors.

There is a slight stir when the jury stumble into their places. The twelve good men and true are an extraordinarily ordinary-looking collection. Still, every one of them has a confident, self-important look. To some of those present the reflection that those twelve men are going to decide the awful question of a fellow being’s life or shameful death brings with it a sensation of unease.

By some mistake, which will be severely noted in to-morrow’s Press, the newspaper men have not been allowed, till now, to enter the Court. They file in and take the places allotted to them. Jean Bower, though she has no reason to love newspapers, tells herself that she wishes they composed the jury rather than the stolid, rather stupid-looking, men who are exactly opposite to her.

And then at last, very quietly, so quietly that half the people present do not immediately realize what is happening, the prisoner is brought up from the cells below and walks with firm step into the dock.

Henry Garlett is dressed in a blue serge suit, and wears a double collar and a black tie. He looks neither to the right nor to the left, but bows slightly to the judge.

Amid dead silence the clerk of assize reads the charge setting forth that Henry Garlett feloniously and wilfully murdered his wife, Emily Garlett.

The prisoner, in a voice which though the words are not loudly uttered is heard by every one present, says firmly: “Not guilty, my lord.”

The trial is now begun, and even the most frivolous spectators settle down to listen to what will certainly be a terrible and formidable indictment.

Sir Almeric Post, however, puts the case for the Crown 283quite simply, and as undramatically as possible. He tells, in ordinary, everyday language, the story of the painful death of Mrs. Garlett on the 27th of last May. He does not hurry over it. He tells it indeed at some length. And then he goes back to the past lives of the two people with whom he is concerned.

In a fair and passionless manner he describes the marriage of the penniless youth, Henry Garlett, to the considerable, not to say great, heiress, Emily Jones, and briefly mentions the fact that there were no children. He gives full credit to Garlett, as he calls him throughout, for his war service, and then very gravely he tells how this still young man came back to find his wife a hopeless, almost bedridden, invalid. Lightly, skilfully he touches on Garlett’s great fame as a cricketer, and he even reminds the jury of that memorable match last spring, the first match played by the Australians in the old country.

Every one stiffens into eager attention, and even Sir Almeric’s clear, toneless voice changes a little, when he utters the words:

“And now I come to a new figure in the story of Henry Garlett and of Emily Garlett—I refer to Miss Jean Bower.”

For the first time he glances down at the paper, covered with pencilled notes, which he holds in his left hand; and then he gives the precise date of the arrival of the pretty young girl in Terriford village. He explains incidentally that her home with Dr. and Mrs. Maclean is only some ten minutes’ to a quarter of an hour’s walk from the Thatched House. There follows an account of how Garlett had given Jean Bower the position of official secretary to the limited company of which he, Garlett, was managing director. And just because Sir Almeric tells his tale in so simple and almost bald a manner, most of those present somehow realize very vividly how much may lie unsaid behind his measured words.

He does not propose, he says, to call much evidence as to the relations of these two people, but he will call three witnesses who saw them coming home together by the field path from Grendon to Terriford on the day which preceded Mrs. Garlett’s death.

“Both this man and this woman affirm,” he observes in a considering voice, “that they were scarcely acquainted at 284that time, and yet they were sufficiently acquainted to walk something like two miles in each other’s company, and Henry Garlett brought Jean Bower through his own garden, which, perhaps I ought in fairness to add, is something of a short cut to Bonnie Doon, where she was then living with her uncle and aunt.”

All too quickly for some of the ghouls in the public gallery, ay, and in the reserved seats, Sir Almeric sketches lightly but firmly what happened immediately after the return of the apparently disconsolate widower to the Thatched House.

“It is admitted by everybody concerned that from then onward Henry Garlett, the managing director of the Etna China works, and Jean Bower, official secretary of the company, became inseparable. Soon all the factory hands were commenting, though in no disagreeable way, or so I am informed, on their close friendship. I will bring to your notice the fact that Garlett, though besieged with invitations from old friends and acquaintances, scarcely ever went away during those autumn weeks. Now and again he took a Saturday to Monday off, but on the whole he stuck close to his work.”

Sir Almeric waits a few moments, and a glass of water is handed to him.

“And now, gentlemen, we come to a number of significant occurrences. Early in November these two people became betrothed. I cannot tell you the exact date of the engagement, which was kept more or less private by the wish of Dr. Maclean and his wife. But it is admitted that by early December this so-called private engagement was known to the whole of Terriford, and, as a matter of fact, the date of the marriage was actually fixed for December 19th.”

Sir Almeric ends his opening for the prosecution with a strange, dramatic suddenness, and calls in quick succession half a dozen witnesses, of whom by far the most important is Dr. Maclean.

The worthy physician’s ordeal does not last as long as was expected. He is taken through Mrs. Garlett’s long illness, and describes in very clear language her condition just before the night of her fatal illness.

Then he is made to narrate at length the circumstances of Mrs. Garlett’s death—how he was fetched by the sick 285woman’s husband, such a thing having never happened before—how Garlett showed a strange unwillingness to go upstairs, and how the witness then, proceeding alone through the sleeping house, suddenly encountered the parlour-maid, Lucy Warren. Finally, how, after a short colloquy with Miss Cheale, he turned his attention to the sick woman and discovered that she was dead.

The doctor makes it clear that, to the best of his belief, Mrs. Garlett was already dead when he arrived at the house; and then he explains somewhat haltingly why it was that he then made up his mind that his patient had died from heart failure.

In the course of his evidence Dr. Maclean has naturally mentioned Agatha Cheale several times, and so, at the end of the doctor’s cross-examination and re-examination, the judge leans forward and asks Sir Almeric: “Are you going to call Miss Cheale now?” And Sir Almeric says, no, he is not going to call Miss Cheale yet. He would prefer to call certain witnesses who will testify as to the relations between the prisoner and Miss Bower both before and after Mrs. Garlett’s death.

Five people then follow one after the other into the box—three men and two women. The two women each declare that they thought it very strange that a pretty young lady should be made secretary of the company, and one of them, a forewoman, identifies a letter she had written to her sister containing the strangely prophetic sentence: “If anything was to happen to the missus, I should never be surprised if Miss B. became his second.”

An overseer at the factory swears that as early as October 1st—he remembers the date because it was his birthday—he told his wife that he hadn’t a doubt that “the boss was sweet on Miss Bower.” But he asserts that he had also expressed surprise because he had never noticed anything of the kind before Mr. Garlett went away.

That fact is eagerly taken hold of by Sir Harold Anstey, and there follows a keen cross-examination. The great advocate makes some facetious remarks on love and on love-making generally, and the Court for the first time enjoys what perhaps Sir Harold would describe as “a little fun.”

Titters even come from the witnesses’ bench, but Miss 286Prince looks severe, almost disgusted, and as for Jean Bower, the girl becomes even paler than she was before. The prisoner in the dock looks straight before him while all this goes on—he might be carved in stone.

“Call Miss Agatha Cheale!”

The words ring through the court, and a thickly veiled figure walks quickly round to the steps leading to the witness-box. But as she puts her second foot upon the ladder-like steps she trips and would have fallen but for one of the Court officials, who seizes her arm and pulls her to her feet again.

Miss Cheale is sworn and throws back her veil at the judge’s bidding. She, too, is then taken through the story of the death night. To the surprise of many of those present she speaks in a composed, almost mincing, voice. She is asked what happened the afternoon before Mrs. Garlett’s sudden death, and in reply she tells what has come to be called the “strawberry story”—that is, she explains how the strawberries were left by Miss Prince, how she put them on a plate outside Mrs. Garlett’s door immediately after luncheon, and then, how, late in the afternoon, having occasion to go upstairs, she distinctly saw a strange man making his way quickly down the passage.

She adds a detail of considerable interest. This is that she noticed that the plateful of strawberries had disappeared. She adds that this fact was noticed by her quite half an hour before Mr. Garlett went up to his wife’s room.

Sir Harold Anstey, when cross-examining Agatha Cheale, naturally plays up to the story she has told. His object now is to increase, not diminish, the witness’s credit. He draws out of her her very high opinion of both Mr. and Mrs. Garlett. She tells the Court what a devoted couple they were, and how excellent a husband Mr. Garlett was. In fact, she can’t speak too well of them.

Then Miss Cheale has a few unpleasant moments to live through while she is re-examined by Sir Almeric. He presses her very hard, very ruthlessly, about her mysterious stranger. Does she really believe that the stranger she saw hastening down the passage committed the murder? She answers emphatically that yes, she does believe it. Has she anything that could account for such a monstrous and motiveless crime on an unknown man’s part? She replies 287that there is a type of criminally minded human being who does commit motiveless crimes. Criminal lunatic asylums are full of them.

II
“Call Miss Prince!”

There is a look of tense excitement on almost every face in the crowded court-house when the tall, angular figure of Miss Prince steps up, composedly, into the witness-box. Even the dullest witted of the spectators present is aware by now that her evidence will be crucial, one way or the other, to the prisoner.

While she is being sworn, the man in the dock, Henry Garlett, looks at her with a long, steady, rather sad look. The sight of Miss Prince reminds him with painful vividness of his wife, of “poor Emily.”

He is the one person in Court who does not realize the fearful import of the evidence she is about to tender. For one thing, he is well aware that he has only been to the Thatched Cottage on one occasion in two years, and he does not yet understand how very difficult it is to prove a negative.

Sir Almeric Post, for the Prosecution, begins his examination of this witness in a conversational tone. It is almost as if he were calling on Miss Prince in her own house, and asking her a number of not very important questions. And she also answers in a clear, decided voice, the voice that some of the people of Terriford know only too well. It is the voice of the admonitory Miss Prince, not that of Miss Prince the eager gossip.

Briefly she admits she is the daughter of the late Dr. William Prince, that she helped her father in his dispensary, and that when there came the break-up of her home and the sale of the practice to Dr. Maclean, she thought it within her right to take with her to the Thatched Cottage what drugs were left in her father’s dispensary.

And then there comes a sharp quickening of the public interest, and even the judge leans forward. Sir Almeric puts solemnly the question:

“And among those drugs I understand that there was a considerable quantity of arsenic in a stoppered glass jar?”

“There was,” she answers in a clear voice.

288“Is it also a fact that the jar, marked with the word ‘arsenic’ printed on a blue label, stood open to the view of all those who were in a position to glance up into your medicine cupboard when it was open?”

“That is so,” says Miss Prince in a lower tone.

“And now I want you to cast your mind back to last spring.”

Miss Prince makes no answer, she simply looks quietly, thoughtfully at her questioner.

“Can you do that?”

“I think so. Though of course it’s difficult for me to swear to anything that may have happened on any special day.”

“You do, however, remember a late April storm which caused the gutters of your house to overflow and which did damage to the ceiling of a servant’s bedroom on the top floor of your house?”

Miss Prince admits that she remembers the circumstance.

“Now tell us in your own words what followed.”

“I wrote to Mr. Garlett, my landlord, and asked him if he would personally come over to my house and see the damage which had been done. We had never had a lawyer’s agreement. I was an old friend, almost the oldest friend, of Mrs. Garlett. And I was well aware that at any moment the Thatched Cottage could have been let for a considerably larger sum than the rent I was paying. On the other hand, I felt that Mr. Garlett would not mind my asking him to have the gutters of the house attended to. The expense, considerable to me, would be, I felt, small to him; also I should like to say that he was known to me as an exceptionally generous man.”

There is a stir through the Court. The judge leans forward.

“Will you kindly keep to the matter in hand, madam?”

Miss Prince does not look in the least disturbed by this rebuke. She answers quietly:

“Would you prefer, my lord, that Sir Almeric should ask questions and I give answers?”

Miss Prince had once stayed in the company of Sir Almeric at a country house many years ago, and she feels quite at ease with him.

289“No,” says the Judge sharply, “go on with your story. But keep to the matter in hand.”

“Mr. Garlett sent me a note saying that he would try and make time to come and see the damage.”

Another bustle in Court. “Is that note among the exhibits?” There is a hurried looking over of the papers scattered on the table where sit the Crown lawyers in pleasant amity with the prisoner’s solicitor, Mr. Toogood. Yes, the letter is here; Sir Almeric holds it up before Miss Prince.

“Is this the letter?”

“Yes, I certify that that is the letter.”

“As a matter of fact, Miss Prince, you did not actually receive a visit from Mr. Garlett. But you think it almost certain that he came in one day when you happened to be out?”

Miss Prince hesitates. “I cannot say that I consider it almost certain.”

Sir Almeric says quickly: “We have a witness who will swear that you told her you regarded it as practically certain that Mr. Garlett did visit your house to look at the gutters.”

Miss Prince for the first time shows some discomfort.

“I may have said that,” she answers in a low voice, “but now that I am speaking on oath I wish to reassert the fact that I am not certain Mr. Garlett ever came to my house. The only certain thing is that he sent in his builder, and that the gutters were cleaned out and repaired.”

“Is it or is it not a fact that your medicine cupboard was often left open—the door of it, that is, unlocked?”

Sir Almeric’s voice now takes a somewhat unpleasant edge. He had understood that Miss Prince would be a very willing witness against Henry Garlett.

“I am sorry to say that is true. The key did not work properly, and as I am constantly taking things out of my medicine cupboard, cough mixture and so on, for the village folk who come to consult me, I did get into the bad habit of leaving the cupboard door unlocked.”

“It is also a fact, is it not, Miss Prince, that you are constantly in and out of your house—in other words in and out of Terriford village?”

“That is so.”

“And during the month of April you were constantly in 290attendance on a dying woman who had been, or so I understand, for many years in your father’s service. Now, who looked after the house while you were out?”

“During some of the time,” says Miss Prince hesitatingly, “I only had a woman from the village to come in and do for me; therefore, the house was frequently left empty. But when that was the case one of Mr. Garlett’s gardeners was generally about the place.”

“Still, the house was often empty. Do you always lock your back door and your garden door as well when you leave home, or are they sometimes left open? Be careful, Miss Prince, as to your answer to this question.”

Miss Prince hesitates, but only for a moment. She knows only too well what her answer must be.

“I always locked the back door, that giving access to the kitchen, when I left the house empty,” she says in a low voice. “The garden door, which only communicates with the garden of the Thatched House, was generally left open.”

There follows a long pregnant silence. And then there runs a strange convulsive sigh through the Court, for the majority of those present realize that by the admission she has just made Miss Prince has gone far to sign Henry Garlett’s death warrant.

“That means,” goes on Sir Almeric in the same quiet, emotionless tone, “that any one last May could gain access to the Thatched Cottage, and of course to your medicine room, so long as he or she came through the grounds of the Thatched House? It is, is it not, a fact that this entrance to your house—I mean the garden-door entrance—is more or less concealed by an evergreen hedge?”

“That is so,” says Miss Prince.

“To resume—nothing would have been easier for Mr. Garlett than to go to your back premises, open the garden door, and go upstairs to view the damage done by the rain in the gutters?”

“It would have been quite easy for him to do so,” replies Miss Prince hesitatingly, “but to my mind it would have been a very strange thing for a gentleman to do—to come into a lady’s house without asking her leave, to go upstairs, and, if I may say so, poke about!”

291A titter runs through the Court.

And then Sir Almeric observes suavely: “A strange thing to do, no doubt, but gentlemen, Miss Prince, have been known to do very strange things if they had certain objects in view.”

At that there is again “laughter in Court.”

“And now I ask you one last question: As far as you know, was Mr. Garlett aware that there was arsenic in your house?”

Miss Prince remains silent for what seems to her audience a very long time. Once or twice the judge glances down at her rather sharply, and then, just as he is about to ask her if she has understood the question put to her, she answers reluctantly, “Yes, I think Mr. Garlett was probably aware of that fact. He cut his finger very badly about two years ago, and came down to the Thatched Cottage to ask me to bind it up for him. I took him up to my medicine room, for of course I keep lint and bandages there. I remember——” and then Miss Prince stopped short.

“You remember, Miss Prince——?” says Sir Almeric encouragingly.

Miss Prince turns to the judge. “Am I compelled to answer, my lord, what it is that I remember?”

Up leaps Sir Harold Anstey, and there follows between the two great barristers a sharp interchange of words. But at last the judge decides in favour of the prosecution, and Miss Prince is instructed that she must state what it was that she remembers.

And then for the first time the witness becomes obviously very nervous. In a low voice she very hesitatingly admits:

“I remember that the door to my medicine cupboard happened that day to be wide open, and that Mr. Garlett and I had a talk about poisons. But I do not remember that we mentioned arsenic.”

Again there comes that curious stir through the Court.

“That will do, Miss Prince.”

And indeed every one feels that Miss Prince has indeed “done” for Harry Garlett.

And then Sir Harold Anstey takes the place left vacant by the Crown counsel.

“You told Sir Almeric, Miss Prince,” he begins, “that 292though you could cast your mind back to late April, it would be impossible for you to remember what happened on any special day at so great a distance of time. Yet during the last few minutes you have shown yourself possessed of a remarkable memory.”

“You must remember,” replies Miss Prince quickly, “that when I learned what had been the cause of my friend Mrs. Garlett’s death, I realized at once that the only place in Terriford where arsenic could have been procured was in my house.”

“You did not, however, see fit to reveal that very important fact till quite lately. Even then, you did not reveal it to the proper authorities. You told it to Dr. Maclean, thus putting him in a very painful position——”

“I deeply regret now that I did not write to the prosecution direct. But the Garletts had been my nearest neighbours and friends, and I hoped against hope that my arsenic had not been in question. I tried, in a quiet way, to find out if Mr. Garlett had ever been seen in my house, and I found that, as far as anybody knew, he never had been in my house—with the one exception when he came to see me about his cut finger—for two years or more.”

“I put it to you, Miss Prince”—Sir Harold looks at her fixedly—“that any one, by walking from the road into the grounds of the Thatched House, could obtain access to your house through the garden door?”

“That is so,” assents Miss Prince eagerly.

“Were any of your friends in the habit of using that door?”

“Yes, my friend Miss Agatha Cheale—Mrs. Garlett’s housekeeper—always came into my house that way. So of course did any servant bringing a message or a note from the Thatched House to the Thatched Cottage. But you must remember that there was the back door, used by the tradesmen each morning, also the front door. I should like to repeat my conviction that Mr. Garlett would not naturally have thought of coming into my house by the garden door. The time he came to see me after cutting his finger he came to the front door.”

Sir Harold makes a note of this fact, and it is in a pleasant voice that he asks:

293“As far as you know—and I gather you had many opportunities of knowing—Mr. and Mrs. Garlett were on very good terms the one with the other?”

“Excellent terms,” says Miss Prince emphatically.

Deep in her heart she knows that her evidence has gone far to ensure a conviction for murder against Henry Garlett, and now she is anxious to give him the benefit of every doubt that has ever assailed her during the last difficult anxious weeks.

And then Sir Harold makes one of the few mistakes of his brilliant professional life.

“You are acquainted,” he says, “with Miss Jean Bower. I take it, Miss Prince, that you have a very high opinion of that young lady?”

There follows a pause—a terrible pause. It is as if all in the crowded court-house are holding their breath.

“I know very little of Miss Jean Bower,” answers Miss Prince coldly.

Alas, that gives Sir Almeric his chance when re-examining Miss Prince. And he draws out of her with infinite skill, not only that she does not think well of the unhappy girl who will so soon stand where she is standing—that is, in the witness-box—but that, on the very day which preceded Mrs. Garlett’s sudden and terrible death, she actually saw Jean Bower and Henry Garlett walking home together from the Etna China factory.

Miss Prince has proved a most damaging witness. Sir Harold looks grim, preoccupied, and what his enemies call “sour.”

To the surprise of the Court, the next witness is Mr. Garlett’s builder. He is only a short time in the witness-box and what he says is regarded on the whole as bearing against his employer. While he declares that, as far as he can remember, Mr. Garlett had said nothing to him implying that he had actually seen the gutters, he admits that Mr. Garlett had shown a remarkable knowledge of the nature and extent of the damage.

When Sir Harold re-examines, he points out to the man that the letter written by Miss Prince had given the most detailed description of the havoc the rain and storm had caused. Even so, on the whole the general impression of 294the Court is that the builder unwillingly believes that Mr. Garlett had been to the house and seen the damage.

Every one is tired and just a little cross by now. Whatever happens, people must eat, and it is long past one o’clock. The prisoner is taken below. Judge, jury, and lawyers leave the Court, and those spectators who are determined not to lose their places take out their little packets of sandwiches.

There is a buzz of conversation. Bets are freely offered and taken as to how long the trial will last. Only one man present bets on an acquittal. He is a widower, and takes the milk round Terriford village, and though some years younger than Elsie MacTaggart, is supposed to be “sweet” on her.

III
At last the judge comes up and the officials stream in.

“Call Jean Bower!”

What all the people there have been waiting for with almost savage longing is now about to take place, and every eye in Court save the prisoner’s fastens on Jean Bower.

The slight girlish figure ascends the steps into the witness-box. She is painfully pale—her pallor enhanced by her plain black coat and skirt. Yet, strange to say, Jean Bower does not make a pleasant impression. She is too quiet, too self-possessed. It is difficult to visualize her as the heroine of a criminal love drama.

After she has been sworn, Sir Almeric takes her through the story which is now almost tiresomely familiar to most of those present. She sticks firmly to the unlikely tale that till the return of Henry Garlett, four months after his wife’s death, he and she had been on terms of formal acquaintance—nothing more.

And then at last there comes the thrill for which all these men and women who crowd the public galleries to suffocation have been waiting.

“I suppose I may assume that after his return, this last autumn, you became deeply attached to Mr. Garlett?”

There follows a long pause—twice Jean Bower opens her pale lips, but no answer comes from them. Then, slowly, she bends her head.

295“Do you still love him?”

The question is asked in a hard, unemotional voice. But it seems to galvanize the witness into eager, passionate, palpitating life.

She cries out strongly, almost triumphantly: “With all my heart and soul.”

The advocate for the Crown turns away. He has scored a great point. The jury have doubtless been moved by that cry of love and faith, but he, Sir Almeric Post, will soon show them, with the pitiless logic for which he is famed, that the very fact of this overwhelming passion discredits the whole of the evidence Jean Bower has just tendered in so lifeless and composed a manner.

The entire crux of the case turns on what were the real relations of Henry Garlett and Jean Bower before Mrs. Garlett’s death. Were the girl to admit even warm innocent friendship on her employer’s part she would be helping to prove the case for the Crown. And now, who, with any knowledge of feminine human nature, can doubt that she has lied—splendide mendax, as the old Latin tag puts it—“a splendid lie, but a lie all the same?”

“Thank you, Miss Bower; that will do,” he says suavely.

As Sir Harold Anstey is taking the place of his brother advocate in order to re-examine the unhappy girl who all unwittingly has done his client such a fatal mischief by that cry of devoted love, there is an unwonted stir, even a struggle, at one of the doors. Across the now silent Court ring out the words:

“I must speak now—I must speak now!”

The judge leans forward, and Sir Harold turns round, a frown on his face. For the moment public attention is diverted from the slight figure in the witness-box.

Sir Harold, after a whispered word with the Crown counsel, observes:

“One of the female witnesses has only just arrived, my lord, and she seems to have become hysterical.”

Again the loud wailing, the unrestrained voice is heard:

“I must speak—I must speak now.”

Hastily Sir Almeric takes a hand.

“The young woman who desires so urgently to be heard, my lord, was formerly parlour-maid at the Thatched House. 296I doubt, however, if she is in a fit condition to go into the witness-box to-day at all. I understand she has just come from her husband’s death-bed.”

The judge leans forward.

“Do you regard her as an important witness, Sir Almeric?”

“No, my lord. She was moving about the house during the night of Mrs. Garlett’s death. Also she has evidence to tender concerning the secret meetings which took place between Henry Garlett and some unnamed young woman in a wood before Mrs. Garlett’s death.”

Again there rises that strange, unnatural cry—loud, defiant:

“I demand to be heard now! I have the right to be heard now!”

The judge frowns. He peers forward till he thinks he distinguishes the hysterical young woman who has been making such an unseemly disturbance, and then he says, slowly, distinctly, and severely:

“You will be heard when I direct you to be heard. And I now direct that your evidence shall be taken after the rest of the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined, cross-examined, and re-examined.”

During this long altercation Jean Bower, standing in the witness-box, is growing paler and paler. She clutches convulsively the ledge before her, and Sir Harold looks at her with concern. He does not wish her to faint before she has answered his questions; on the other hand he tells himself that the sight of a fainting young woman always touches your more sentimental juryman.

The great advocate happens to be, however, a far more imaginative man than is Sir Almeric Post, and he realizes that Jean Bower’s ordeal has lasted long enough. So, to the disappointment of the Court, he does not address many questions to the young woman who has just acknowledged her passionate love for Harry Garlett, and for the sake of whose love the immense majority—almost every human being present at the trial—believe he has committed a singularly foul and dastardly murder.

Sir Almeric does not trouble to re-examine the witness. He knows by now that he has practically won his case, and he has no wish to cause any of the hapless human beings connected with this painful story any unnecessary distress.

297
IV
Till comparatively lately a British prisoner could not give evidence in his own defence, but that is no longer so, and Henry Garlett is, as is known, eager to go into the witness-box.

At once, when he is facing the Court with a strained tense look, it becomes clear that Sir Almeric does not intend to play with the wretched man as a cat plays with a mouse. He leaves those methods to Sir Harold Anstey. To the deep disappointment of many of those present, after Harry Garlett has been sworn, only a comparatively short interchange of question and answer takes place between the man now on trial for his life and the man who leads the prosecution against him:

“I understand that your only answer to the terrible charge of which you stand accused is that you are absolutely and entirely innocent?”

“That is my answer,” says Henry Garlett in a firm voice.

“Well, I will just take you briefly through the principal points. You lived, I understand, for thirteen years with this poor lady whom you married when you were only twenty-two and she twenty-seven—you being a penniless lad, and she a considerable heiress?”

“That is so,” says the prisoner.

“Though you claim to have been attached to your wife, you were constantly away from home—in fact we have it on record that out of the three hundred sixty-five days of one year you were away one hundred forty-four days.”

“I think that is very possible.”

“If necessary I can prove it.”

“I accept your statement.”

“Miss Jean Bower became secretary to the Etna China Company on April 23rd. I understand that you claim to have been scarcely aware of the fact that a charming young woman had entered your employment in the capacity of official secretary to the limited company of which you were managing director?”

“Of course I was aware that Miss Jean Bower had become secretary to my company. But, as you yourself have just pointed out, I was away a great deal. Until we walked 298home together the day before my wife’s death, I had hardly done more than exchange a few words with Miss Bower.”

“And yet, during the month before your wife’s death—a month which, curiously enough, coincided with the stay of Miss Bower at the Etna China factory—you were far more often at your china factory than had been the case for some time before.”

“I deny that!” exclaims Henry Garlett. “Or if it happens to be technically true, it was only because I was just then preparing for the Australian cricket match.”

“And now, Mr. Garlett, are you prepared to swear that you did not go the Thatched Cottage as a result of the note sent you by Miss Prince?”

“I swear that the only time I was in the Thatched Cottage for full two years was the day I went down to show a cut finger to Miss Prince.”

“Do you remember the circumstances of your visit to her?”

“Yes, very well. It was the first time I had ever been in her medicine room, though I had heard of it.”

“Can you recall any conversation you had with her?”

“Yes,” replies Harry Garlett firmly. “I recall our conversation quite clearly. What is more, I do not mind telling you frankly that Miss Prince did mention the fact that she possessed in her medicine cupboard three poisons—arsenic, morphia, and opium.”

There is a stir through the Court, and for a moment Sir Almeric is taken aback.

“Then you now admit that you were aware of the existence of arsenic in the Thatched Cottage?”

“I have never denied it——”

“Don’t quibble, Garlett. Is there anything further you would like to say about this point?”

“Yes, I would like to say that I remember advising Miss Prince to hand over the three drugs in question to Dr. Maclean. But I should like to add, though no doubt you will not believe me——”

The judge intervened sternly: “You have no right to suggest such a thing to counsel for the Crown.”

“I beg your pardon. I should not have said that.”

“What is it you wish to add?”

299“Simply that the fact of the conversation that day had actually slipped my memory till my solicitor, about a fortnight ago, told me of Miss Prince’s admission as to her possession of arsenic.”

Sir Almeric moves some of the papers he is holding in one of his hands to the other hand, and then he asks in almost a casual tone:

“I suppose I may take it that you were exceedingly surprised when you learned that your wife had died from the administration of an enormous dose of arsenic?”

The prisoner stares at him. Then he answers quickly:

“I was more than surprised, I was astounded.”

At that Sir Almeric Post straightens himself.

“And yet you ask the jury to believe that while the whole village was ringing with the question as to where the poison administered to Mrs. Garlett could have come from, you had forgotten the all-important fact that there was a large supply of arsenic within a few yards of your front door?”

Henry Garlett looks manifestly troubled. For a few moments he loses that air of calm, quiet, rigid self-control.

“I admit it is very strange,” he says at last, in a hesitating voice, “but you must remember two things. First, that I was unaware of the importance attached to the question of how the arsenic had reached my house. Secondly, that I had always known in a vague way that Miss Prince had in her possession many dangerous drugs which, as a rule, can only be procured from a chemist. I mean by that, I was not specially surprised at her admission that she had a number of poisons in her medicine cupboard.”

He has spoken slowly, rather picking his words, and the admission—if admission it can be called—makes a bad impression on the Court. The audience in the galleries all feel that they would have certainly remembered such a startling fact as that a large amount of poison was in the possession of a maiden lady living in such a quiet place as Terriford seems to have been.

Other questions are put to the prisoner. After all, Sir Almeric Post is expected to work for his bread, and it would never do were he to conduct the examination of a man accused of murder in too rapid or perfunctory a manner.

Garlett is shown the letter which was written to him by 300Jean Bower, and which was the immediate cause of his return home earlier than he was expected. He is taken step by step through the various stages of his growing friendship with her, and pressed again and again as to the degree of his knowledge of her before his wife’s death.

But when the counsel for the Prosecution has done, there is a general impression that the witness has been let off very lightly. It is clear that Sir Almeric regards the prisoner as already under sentence of death.

Then comes the turn of Sir Harold Anstey. Sir Harold goes on quite another tack to what he has done up to now. His object is to show what a good, genial, delightful fellow Harry Garlett has always proved himself to be.

Though in his heart of hearts he considers cricket to be an idiotic pastime, and though he has on occasion quoted with approval Kipling’s famous line about “the flannelled fools at the wicket,” he has made a special study of cricket in the last week, and he now shows that knowledge to the admiration of the Court, and especially to the admiration of those present—they are a large number—who make a fetish of the national game. He shows that his client is not only a famous cricketer but also a remarkably modest cricketer—and not till he has made that fact quite clear does he begin on the real subject in hand.

The judge has hardly listened while all this is going on. In fact he has been leaning back, for the first time, a slight ironic smile on his face. But after all, this is a cause célèbre. Sir Harold Anstey is a popular figure, and must be allowed a fair run for his money. The judge reflects that fortunately for Sir Harold the money will be forthcoming this time, for, unlike the majority of murderers, Henry Garlett is a man of substance.

At last, however, Sir Harold gets down to real business. In an almost cooing voice he asks his client something as to his happy married life. But there he is not quite as successful as he had hoped to be, or Harry Garlett is curiously unwilling to make any play with that side of his past. He answers yes or no to the probing questions, though at one moment he is obviously so painfully moved that some few people began to believe that perhaps he did really care for his first wife.

301However, Sir Harold, who is nothing if not tactful when dealing with a difficult witness, now turns to the question of the Etna China works. He draws from his client an account of all that has been done in the last ten years, and especially since the war, for the benefit of the workers. He makes it clear what a happy family they all were, and then, with light, skilful touches, he brings out how important was Miss Bower’s share in promoting harmony and comfort at the factory. He is even successful in making the Court realize something of what a very charming, old-fashioned girl she seems to have been.

Sir Almeric, who is very tired by now, and who knows that to-morrow he will have to make a long, clear speech to the stolid jury, does not re-examine, and when, after two hours in the witness-box, Harry Garlett goes back to the dock, he is mercifully quite unaware that, had there been the slightest doubt in anybody’s mind as to his guilt, he might have been kept in that box for four or five hours.

V
And now opens the second day of the trial of Henry Garlett on the charge of having murdered his wife. The crowds round the doors of the Assize Court are almost as large as ever, and yet there is not the same feeling of excitement that there was on the first day.

For one thing, all the most important witnesses have already been in the box. For another, the trial, though the verdict is regarded as a foregone conclusion, is not expected to conclude till to-morrow. A good many unimportant witnesses have still to be examined, among them a number of well-known men, each of whom, when the issue of the trial appeared far more uncertain than it does now, had expressed themselves willing to tender evidence as to “character.” These gentlemen will testify that is, that they have always regarded Henry Garlett as a high-minded man, the best of good fellows, and so on.

After all these minor witnesses have been called, examined, cross-examined, and re-examined, then Sir Almeric Post will begin his address to the jurymen. Though it is known that Sir Almeric never cuts a speech short, it is thought he will 302finish in time to allow Sir Harold to make a start to-day. Sir Harold’s speeches to a jury are a delight to listen to, but there seems some doubt as to whether the famous advocate, who is known not to like interrupting a great oration in the middle, may not so manoeuvre matters, with the kindly connivance of his brother in the law, Sir Almeric, as to put off the beginning of his speech till to-morrow morning.

Yes, to-morrow is likely to be a very exciting day! There will be Sir Harold’s pathetic powerful plea for the murderer; the clear summing-up by the judge, who, although an old man, has his wits keenly about him; and then the jury’s retirement, maybe for quite a short time, maybe for a long time—one can never tell which, even when the verdict is a foregone conclusion.

However, as was said a great, great many times—perhaps a million times by various men and women all over the kingdom that same evening and the next morning—it is the unexpected in life that very often happens, and makes the best-laid plans go wrong.

Behold the Court assembled, the galleries full to bursting, but the ladies in the reserved seats are not all of them quite so distinguished-looking as those who graced the first day of the trial. On the other hand, two noted novelists—one a man the other a woman—have come down from London to be present at the closing scenes.

The judge has just taken his seat, but the prisoner has not yet been brought up from below into the dock, when Sir Harold Anstey rises and asks to be heard.

“I have received, my lord, a very important communication,” he says, in a tone of such marked gravity that every one stiffens into attention.

And then—was it by some mistake, or in the natural course of events?—the prisoner is brought up between two warders to take his usual place.

He looks tired, dispirited, and for the first time his eyes seem to seek out hungrily, thirstily, the figure of Jean Bower, sitting below him on the witnesses’ bench. As if drawn by some magnetic influence, she turns her head round at last, and they exchange a long, piteous look.

In answer to Sir Harold, the judge observes in a slow, unimpassioned tone:

303“I, too, have received what is no doubt a copy of what you term an important communication, Sir Harold. I am exceedingly surprised that the parties in question should have waited till this morning—in fact, till just half an hour ago—to put this communication before me. I have already taken certain steps, and I have no doubt you have done the same, to test, shall we say, the value? of this communication. I understand that both the solicitors for the Crown and Mr. Toogood, the prisoner’s solicitor, are even now in telephonic communication with London.”

The judge’s words are listened to in absolute silence, and no one can make head or tail of what they mean. But it is plain that both Mr. Justice Freshwater and those two great protagonists, Sir Almeric Post and Sir Harold Anstey, are very much disturbed.

All kinds of wild rumours are current, but the low murmur of conversation is stilled by the loud voices of the ushers ordering “Silence, silence in Court!”

Every ear is strained to miss not a word as Sir Almeric takes up the ball in this mysterious legal game. He says in a very low voice:

“In all the circumstances, my lord, I have arranged with Sir Harold Anstey that he shall call Mrs. Cheale, formerly Lucy Warren, as his witness, not mine. He proposes, with your leave, to put her at once into the box.”

A feeling of intense relief sweeps through the Court. Then everything is going on according to plan? True, those with sharper ears than the others had caught the name of Mrs. Cheale. But most of the eager listeners suppose that it is Miss Agatha Cheale who is going to be re-examined. Into just a few minds there darts a sudden, lightning suspicion. Agatha Cheale had always been something of a dark horse; has she any revelation to make which she studiously concealed while in the witness-box yesterday?

Here and there some expert in criminology asked himself or herself whether, after all, Agatha Cheale was not in some way “in it,” an accomplice, maybe, of Henry Garlett?

But curiosity will have to wait; for all at once, and strange to say without her name being called out in the usual way, a tall young woman is seen almost running up the steps of the witness-box.

304She wears what, to the expert feminine eyes now insistently fastened on her, are obviously cheap, ready-made, badly cut mourning clothes; a rusty black serge coat and skirt, and a curious-looking little black bonnet of the kind which some of the older people in Court can remember having been worn when they were young—a princess bonnet it used to be called. This particular princess bonnet has a queer wispy veil hanging down behind. In fact the young woman—she is not only a young but a very good-looking woman, so all the men in Court notice—looks like a widow of the humblest working class.

Instead of being ordered to stand down, in order that Agatha Cheale may be called, to the general surprise the stranger is sworn.

With this witness the taking of the oath is not a perfunctory formality, as it seemed to be with so many of the witnesses, but a very solemn act. And, while she is being sworn, she looks at the judge as if he were the only person in that crowded Court.

Sir Harold rises to his feet, and then the witness suddenly cries out: “May I speak now?”

The judge leans forward.

“No, madam, you may not speak now. You are here to answer questions put to you by counsel.”

She is obviously cowed by those quiet firm cold tones, and clasps her hands nervously together on the ledge of the witness-box as she stares distrustfully at the tall, stout gentleman who is now going to put to her those questions to which alone she may make answer.

“Your name,” begins Sir Harold in a very kindly, conversational voice, “is Lucy Cheale?”

Most of the general public in Court are surprised. What an odd mistake for the great advocate to have made! But of course he is tired—tired and worried no doubt by that important communication concerning which he and the judge have just had that curious little mysterious interchange of words.

He goes on quickly: “You were Lucy Warren?”

Now he has corrected himself—so think all those who have not noted that little word “were.”

“Yes, sir, and I——”

305“Stop! Allow me to put my question—it will be far quicker in the end. I mean by that, Mrs. Cheale——”

Hullo! Mrs. Cheale? What is happening to Sir Harold—the quick, the bold, the resourceful, the man whose astonishing memory is almost proverbial? Another thing happens which is extraordinarily unusual with him—that is a piece of paper is handed to him by his junior, and from it he reads the following questions, and in each case without waiting for an answer.

“You are the daughter of Mrs. Warren of the Thatched Farm? Your age is now twenty-four? Till ten days ago you were in the employment of Miss Prince at the Thatched Cottage? Before that you were for a considerable time head parlour-maid at the Thatched House?”

He reads over these questions, or rather assertions, very rapidly, and each time the woman witness nods her head.

“And now I ask you to recall what happened nine—or was it ten—days ago?”

Nine or ten days ago? Sir Harold surely means nine months ago?

Again the witness nods, this time eagerly.

“You received the following telegram?”

Again Sir Harold turns round, and again a piece of paper is handed up to him.

The witness holds out her hand.

“No, the jury must hear the telegram, so I will read it out.”

In clear tones Sir Harold, turning to face the jury, reads out slowly the address, “Miss Lucy Warren, The Thatched Cottage, Terriford.” Then he pauses dramatically, and goes on:

This conveys an offer of marriage from one who is your devout lover. I am dying, and I want you. Lose not an hour. Come at once to 106, Coburg Square, London.—Guy Cheale.

Guy Cheale? Who on earth is he?

There is great excitement in Court, and again the ushers have to command “Silence!”

Here is a rare slice of human nature with a vengeance! Though what all this can have to do with Henry Garlett is 306a complete mystery. Many of the spectators in their eagerness rise from their seats in order to get a better view of the young woman who has inspired so strange, so pathetic, so desperate an offer of marriage.

One or two stupid people ask themselves whether, when a witness has married in the interval between the commission of a crime and the trial of the criminal, he or she has to explain how and why the marriage came about.

Sir Harold looks at his witness with his kindest, most benignant expression, as he asks in a soft tone, and yet one which is heard throughout all the Court:

“I take it that you were deeply attached to this man Guy Cheale—that you and he had some kind of an understanding?”

Her head drops, she whispers inaudibly: “Yes, I loved him dearly.”

The great advocate repeats, for the benefit of those who had not heard, the whispered words, “You loved him dearly. And so, without even waiting to ask your mistress’s permission, you left a note on the kitchen table, went to the village post office and drew out some money from the Savings Bank, and went straight off to London?”

Again there comes an almost inaudible “Yes.”

“And now, Mrs. Cheale, we come to a very important part of your evidence. You realize that you are on oath?”

This time she answers quite loud, “I do, sir.”

“I pass over quickly the fact that within twenty-four hours of your arrival you were married to this man, Guy Cheale, on what was practically his death bed. But even before the marriage he made to you a certain communication?”

She bends her head.

“Now tell his lordship and the jury in your own words what that communication was?”

The witness straightens herself, and the judge, leaning forward, looks at her keenly.

“I must ask you,” he says, but in no unkind tone, “to speak up, madam. Otherwise the jury will not hear you.” He might have added, “And I myself am a little hard of hearing.”

307The witness begins in a loud voice:

“Mr. Cheale told me that before we were married he had something to tell me about himself——”

She stops short. Every one is staring at her. What is all this about? Who is Mr. Cheale? By this time every one in Court realizes that he must be related to Agatha Cheale, as Cheale is such an odd name. Also, a good many people know that Agatha Cheale has a brother. Is it conceivable that he gave his sister away? Can it be that Agatha Cheale committed the murder?

Almost alone of all those present, the man in the dock looks uninterested in what is going on. He has become so tired, so utterly weary.

But there is one person in Court—nobody is looking at her—who is almost fainting with excitement and suspense. That person is Jean Bower. Her head is thrown back. She is gazing up into the troubled face of the woman who is in the box just above her.

“He asked me,” goes on the witness, her voice gathering strength, “if I would mind marrying a murderer.”

There is an extraordinary stir, by far the greatest stir there has yet been in that Court.

“I answered him prompt—‘No, not if he was the murderer.’”

One or two women giggle hysterically, and there comes a stern “Silence!” from the judge himself.

“He then went on to tell me that it was he who had poisoned Mrs. Garlett.”

A strange sound, a kind of strangled half-sigh, half-groan, issues from the man in the dock. He slips down, and is seen through the railings of the dock lying in a heap on the floor.

One of the warders, after stooping down, stands up and says stolidly:

“The prisoner has fainted, my lord. Shall we take him below?”

“Yes, and do not bring him back till I direct you to do so.”

But this occurrence, which would have made such an impression at any other time, is scarcely noticed.

Sir Harold addresses the witness encouragingly:

“I understand you to say that Guy Cheale, your late 308husband, confessed to you before the marriage took place that he had poisoned Mrs. Garlett. Did he tell you what motive inspired him to commit this crime?”

For the first time the witness falters. She turns to the judge.

“Have I got to answer that, your worship?”

The judge hesitates.

“No,” he says at last. “I do not direct you to answer that question.”

Sir Harold, now frowning a little, turns again to his witness, “What happened after this conversation with Guy Cheale?”

“I got him to let me send for the doctor, because I thought he was going to die right then.”

“But to the best of your belief—this is a very important point, Mrs. Cheale—he was absolutely in his right mind when he made this strange communication to you?”

“Yes, absolutely in his right mind, sir. In fact, he wanted me to have in somebody to take down the statement he had just made to me. But I was frightened—I thought he would be taken to prison. Cruel things are done, sir, sometimes, to us poor folk, even when we’re dying.”

Sir Harold in a moved tone says:

“I fear that is so, though I would fain hope not, Mrs. Cheale.”

He waits a moment. He is so obviously, so genuinely moved, that every one in Court feels a sudden wave of liking for him.

“Very well,” he says, recovering himself. “Now tell me what happened next.”

“We was married then, sir. He’d fixed it all up before I came.”

Her face suddenly relaxes; it becomes almost cheerful as she adds:

“Of course he’d known all along that nothing he’d done would make any difference to me.”

Sir Harold goes on in a matter-of-fact tone:

“The moment the marriage had been solemnized, he insisted, I understand, on your sending for what I may call an unofficial witness?”

“Yes, sir. The minute the clergyman and all that was 309gone, he made me call the landlady of the place where he was living—Mrs. Lightfoot’s her name. She had got quite fond of him before I came. She was the marriage witness—leastways one of them. He says to her: ‘Mrs. Lightfoot, I’ve something to tell you. It’s very grave—you’ve got to remember it. Maybe you’ll be sworn and asked about it.’ Then he told her what he had told me.”

“You mean he repeated to her the statement that he had poisoned Mrs. Emily Garlett?”

The witness again became almost inaudible, but it was evident that she had answered, “Yes, sir.”

“I understand, Mrs. Cheale, that it was not till the day before his death that he succeeded in persuading you to send for a commissioner for oaths?”

She answers in a low, halting voice:

“When the doctor told me he couldn’t last out the night, I didn’t think it mattered what happened. Besides, I knew they couldn’t do much till the next day, and I believed that the next day he would be dead—and so he was.”

“The commissioner for oaths,” Sir Harold looked at one of the papers in his hand, “is Mr. Theophilus Jones——”

There runs a nervous laugh through the Court. The judge looks very stern.

Sir Harold goes on—“of 15, London Wall. That gentleman, or so I understand, has influenza. That is why he is not here to-day.”

The witness answers, “Yes, sir—I’m afraid he caught cold coming out to see my husband at night time.”

There is another titter, which is quickly suppressed.

“You see, sir, I didn’t know what to do! And then Mrs. Lightfoot, she says to me, ‘There’s a gentleman as is a commissioner for oaths living in this very square. It was him as had to do with the lease of this house.’ So I went round to his home, sir, and I just told him the truth—that my dear husband was dying and wanted to make a confession to him. He’s an old gentleman, and he was very kind to me. He said it wasn’t in order, but that he’d come. And he did, sir. My husband had made me put down—he was too weak to write himself—what he wanted said, and the old gentleman, Mr. Jones, he read it over to him, and then my husband swore it was all true.”

310At this point Mr. Toogood is seen entering the Court, and a memorandum is handed up to the judge.

Meanwhile the witness remains standing quite still in the box staring before her as if hardly knowing where she is.

Sir Harold reads a note from the judge, and then he goes on with his examination of the witness.

“Your husband, I understand, died within five hours of making this statement?”

“That is so, sir.”

“That was early yesterday morning?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And you started at once, Mrs. Cheale, for Grendon? I understand you did this in obedience to a desire expressed by him?”

“Yes, sir. He made a joke like; he says to me: ‘You won’t have many opportunities of keeping your marriage vow—to obey me, Lucy—but I do give you an opportunity now. The minute the breath’s out of my body,’ he says, ‘you’re to go straight off with that paper of which you’ve got a copy. You’re to go to the office of that—’” she hesitates—“‘that rascally lawyer, Toogood,’ he called him, but then, sir, he always said all lawyers were rascals, and he often would have his joke. ‘There,’ he says, ‘you’re to find Toogood, and you’re to put this before him. No good telegraphing,’ he said, ‘to judge or counsel. Lawyers are dull, hide-bound villains, they’d take no notice of a telegram, they’d think it was a hoax.’”

The audience in Court turned amused eyes on the gentlemen who are hearing themselves so candidly described. But if they expect to see any signs of self-conscious confusion, they are disappointed. All the lawyers remain perfectly calm, and the witness goes on:

“He says to me, ‘Have you enough money for a motor, Lucy? That would perhaps be quickest of all. Then, on the other hand,’ he says, ‘you might be killed in the motor. So best go by train,’ he said. So I did what he wished. The moment he was dead I left him alone with that kind soul, Mrs. Lightfoot, and I only stopped long enough on the way to the station to get the black clothes I’m now wearing——”

And now the judge leans forward.

311“I regret,” he said somewhat severely, “that this statement of yours was not put in yesterday.”

“I never had no chance, sir—your worship. I did try to be heard.”

Sir Harold interposes:

“May I ask your lordship to allow me to read the sworn statement made by Guy Cheale?”

Then Sir Almeric jumps up. He looks ruffled and disturbed, as he intimates:

“I do not oppose my learned friend’s application, my lord.”

The next thing to do is to release the witness.

“That will do, Mrs. Cheale,” says Sir Harold in a courteous tone. “We thank you very much for the clear way in which you have given your evidence. I understand that you wish to go back to London as soon as possible. If so, I hope you will use my motor car.”

A murmur of admiration for Sir Harold’s thoughtful kindness runs through the Court. But to the judge Sir Harold’s public announcement of his kindness seems highly irregular, and his lordship hastens to create a diversion.

“Sir Almeric Post,” he observes in his frigid tones, “in view of what is contained in that sworn statement, it is for you to read it to the jury, and not Sir Harold Anstey.”

“Very good, my lord,” says Sir Almeric, and then, in his passionless, clear tones he reads out the following words:

“I, Guy Cheale, in full possession of all my faculties though a dying man, wish to put it on record that I administered the arsenic to Mrs. Emily Garlett for reasons best known to myself, and which from my point of view were sufficiently good and conclusive at the time, though I do not expect any one else in the present state of our peculiar, complex civilization, built as it is on a pyramid of lies, to agree with me.

“My sister, Agatha Cheale, then lady housekeeper at the Thatched House, asked me three days before Mrs. Emily Garlett’s death to take a note for her to Miss Prince’s house, the Thatched Cottage. She informed me I could get straight into the house through a garden door.

“I followed her directions and found myself in the empty 312house. I laid the letter on the hall table. I then bethought myself that I would go upstairs, as I’d heard Miss Prince had a curious collection of medicaments, and I have always been much interested in drugs.

“I found the room in which they were kept with no difficulty. The cupboard door was open, and I noticed the stoppered bottle of arsenic. I took out about an ounce of the white powder and put it in an envelope which I had in my pocket. I then walked back to the Thatched Farm. There I transferred the arsenic to a large empty pill-box. To the best of my belief the pill-box, with some of the arsenic still in it, will be found behind the fourth row of books in the small glazed bookcase in the parlour there.

“I ought here to add that when in the medicine room of Miss Prince’s house I turned up the entry ‘Arsenic’ in a medical work on her table. I thus discovered the right dose for an adult. On the afternoon which preceded Mrs. Garlett’s death I was one of two or three people who went and sat with her for a time. In a sense I may say I acted on a sudden impulse, for when I saw the small plateful of strawberries outside her door with the sugar sifter close to it I thought it an ideal opportunity for the accomplishment of my purpose.

“I asked her whether she would care to have the strawberries, and she said yes, that she had not known there were strawberries there. I went out of the room and mixed the arsenic with the sugar, then I brought the plate into her room. After she had eaten the strawberries I bade her good-bye and removed the plate—she thought outside the door—as a matter of fact I took it away with me, and threw it under a bush in the little wood, where it doubtless still is.

“I left the house as far as I know without having been seen, though Lucy Warren had admitted me, and we had had a short talk. Lucy was on the point of leaving the house owing to our having been found together—I may add not in any compromising sense—in the drawing room the night before by my sister and Mrs. Garlett. Mrs. Garlett, of course, had not recognized me. My sister, who is a generous woman, handed over to me practically the whole of her legacy—her unexpected legacy of a thousand pounds, which Mrs. Garlett left her in her will.”

313Suddenly there breaks across the level, passionless tones of Sir Almeric’s voice a loud groan, and for the second time that day a man faints in Court. He is hastily taken below, but not before the Grendon folk present recognize him as Enoch Bent, Lucy Cheale’s uncle and Mr. Toogood’s highly respected head clerk. Few, however, of those who recognize him ask themselves why Guy Cheale’s reference in his statement to Mrs. Garlett’s will and the legacy to Guy Cheale’s sister should have had such an effect on the worthy Bent.

Fortunately for Bent, there is no need for him to be put in the witness-box, there to have drawn from him, by the persuasive arts of Sir Harold Anstey, an account—nay, a confession—of certain highly reprehensible and most unprofessional confidences concerning Mrs. Garlett’s will, made before that lady’s tragic death. That other and greater confession—the confession of Guy Cheale on his death-bed—has shed an amply sufficient light on the Terriford Mystery.

After the slight interruption caused by Bent’s collapse and removal, Sir Almeric goes on reading Guy Cheale’s statement from the exact place where he broke off:

“With this money I went abroad, and I was still abroad when the exhumation of Mrs. Garlett took place, and when Mr. Garlett was committed for trial. While abroad—in Spain, as a matter of fact—I became exceedingly ill. I therefore made for home. My sister unwillingly consented to hire a room in the house in which she was then living, namely the house in which I am now.

“In a sense it has been a race between my life and that of Henry Garlett. I hope—I try to persuade myself—that I should, in any case, have made this confession even had I not been a dying man. Had I done so I should of course have put myself first out of the power of English law, which would not have been difficult, as I have always been a rolling stone, as the silly saying is.

“I hope it will not be considered egotistic on my part to put on record my high appreciation of my wife’s fine nature. She is a thoroughly good woman, and I hope that in time she will forgive me, and that some man—a thousand-fold better man than I can claim to be—will make her yet a happy woman.”

314And what is happening meantime in the cold, rather dark cell, where so many unhappy prisoners have sat, waiting to be taken upstairs to hear the verdict?

By special leave of the judge, Jean Bower has been allowed to go below and join her lover, who will not now be a prisoner for long.

Together again at last, Harry Garlett and Jean Bower are sitting on a hard wooden bench, hand in hand. They are not alone. Two warders are watching them with stolid faces, and they are still feeling bewildered, oppressed, by this wonderful thing that has happened to them.

Harry Garlett is saying to himself, “Guy Cheale? Guy Cheale! Why, Emily liked him—she liked him.”

The door opens. “Mr. Garlett,” says a kind voice—the voice of the Governor of Grendon Gaol. “Will you and Miss Bower come upstairs to hear the verdict?”

They get up. Still hand in hand they mount the dark stairs. Then the prisoner—he is still a prisoner—raises Jean’s hand and kisses it.

They emerge into the crowded Court, all eyes upon them, and he goes on up into the dock for the last time, while she walks round to the witness bench, where Dr. Maclean has preceded her.

The jury are all in their places. They have evidently had no difficulty in arriving at their verdict.

Then the clerk of the Court calls out:

“How say you, gentlemen—guilty or not guilty?”

The foreman of the jury, looking very pale, answers in a firm voice:

“Not Guilty.”

THE END
TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES
Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in spelling.
Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TERRIFORD MYSTERY ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Jane Austen and her works
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Jane Austen and her works

Author: Sarah Tytler

Release date: May 20, 2023 [eBook #70809]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Cassell Petter, Galpin & Co, 1880

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JANE AUSTEN AND HER WORKS ***
JANE AUSTEN AND HER WORKS.
JANE AUSTEN

JANE AUSTEN.

Jane Austen

& Her Works

decorative image by decorative image

Sarah Tytler.

Steventon Rectory Hants

Steventon Rectory Hants
Cassell, Petter Galpin & Co.
London, Paris & New York

[All Rights Reserved]
JANE AUSTEN
AND HER WORKS.

BY
SARAH TYTLER.

WITH A PORTRAIT ON STEEL.

Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co.:
LONDON, PARIS & NEW YORK.

[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Jane Austen	1
Jane Austen’s Novels	42
Pride and Prejudice	54
Northanger Abbey	129
Emma	200
Sense and Sensibility, and Mansfield Park	322
Persuasion	331
[Pg vii]

PREFACE.
My intention in this book is to present in one volume to an over-wrought, and in some respects over-read, generation of young people the most characteristic of Jane Austen’s novels, together with her life. I think the tales and the life are calculated to reflect light on each other; I think, also, that the arrangement of the tales—which I have selected as the author wrote them, and not as they happened to be published, particularly in reference to the fact that the two which I have given first were written more than ten years before “Emma” and “Persuasion”—is an advantage, in permitting the growth of the author’s mind and taste to be recognised. I have used my own judgment in the selection of the stories, and in the degree and manner in which I have condensed them. It is with reverent hands that I have touched these great English novels, for the purpose of bringing them into such compass as may make them readily accessible to all, and especially to young readers, apt to be wearied by the slightest diffuseness. Wherever it has been possible, in view of my aim, I have used the author’s own words, as incomparably the best for the characters and situations. I have pointed out here and there the great changes in[Pg viii] social standards, customs and fashions since Jane Austen wrote; while it is her glory that the human nature in her books and the human nature in every generation are the same. I have occasionally called attention to an unrivalled piece of art, which a too eager or an inexperienced reader may be in danger of overlooking.

So far from presuming to wish to draw readers from Jane Austen’s novels in their complete form, it is my earnest desire to send many a young student who may be tempted to quench her intellectual thirst at sources utterly unworthy of the great English novelist, to the originals of the tales I have abridged.

I have much pleasure in acknowledging the obligation I owe to Mr. Austen Leigh, Jane Austen’s nephew, who, with tender and reverent care, gathered together and recorded all the particulars that remained of her personal and family history. I have drawn solely and largely from this biography, which is, indeed, the only authorised memoir of the author.

⁂ The portrait which, by the kindness of the Austen Leigh family and Mr. Bentley, we are enabled to put as the frontispiece to this work, has the interest of being a faithful copy of the only portrait that was ever taken of Jane Austen, a rough sketch made by her sister Cassandra, and afterwards touched by the hand of a professional artist, and while it cannot claim to be a perfect portrait, it is considered by those who have seen and known the great novelist to be a fairly good likeness of her.

[Pg 1]

decorative image

JANE AUSTEN AND HER WORKS.

JANE AUSTEN.
I.

T is said there is an ancient tradition in the East, that close on a certain date of the year are born the men to whom are given special gifts to enlighten and delight their fellow-creatures. To, or near to, this date we can assign the birthdays of William Caxton, by the invention of printing the father of widely-diffused learning; William Shakespeare, with his marvellous knowledge of human nature; Cervantes, the great humourist; and William Wordsworth, to whom skies and hills, trees and flowers, beasts and birds, had a voice, and told a story which he could make plain to the duller comprehension of thousands. But no Oriental sage had a word to say in anticipation of the birthday—at a very different season of the year—when there looked out for the first time on the world and its wonders, the child-eyes of a woman who was to edify and charm some of the wisest men of her own and succeeding generations.

Women may well be proud of the woman who has[Pg 2] been held, on high authority, second only to Shakespeare in the comprehension of the springs which move the heart.

Girls may well be proud of the girl who, strange to say, wrote two of her masterpieces, “Pride and Prejudice” and “Northanger Abbey,” before she had completed her twenty-third year. When other girls were practising their music and working at their embroidery, having their youthful gaieties and youthful dreams, Jane Austen, who was fair to see and charming to listen to, who practised her music, sewed at her worsted-work, joined in gatherings of young people, and had her morning visions with the best, possessed in addition the power, and found the time, to accomplish those wonders of fiction which, for their subtle reproduction of character, and exquisite weaving of a web so like that of the common lot, have been the instruction and solace—not of companion girls alone, but of statesmen and historians, philosophers and poets, down to the present day.

Both men and women may be proud of the woman who did this great thing, yet who never forfeited a tittle of her womanliness; who was essentially as good, true, and dear, as devoted to home, as cherished in its narrow circle, as the most obscure of her sisters, who are nothing to the world while they are everything to their own people.

The slight yet not unsatisfactory record of Jane Austen’s life came late to literature, after most of the materials which might have supplied a fuller memoir had been destroyed, and nearly every contemporary recollection of her was lost. The relatives who were left to accomplish a biography of the “Aunt Jane” whose personal kindness had made so deep an impression on them half a century before, and of whose permanent and still-increasing fame they have remained justly proud, were more or less elderly people, and were not writers like the subject of the biography. But any disadvantages which exist are not without their ample[Pg 3] compensation in the affectionate simplicity and pathos of the narrative.

Jane Austen was born a hundred and four years ago, on December 16th, 1775, at the parsonage house of Steventon, in Hampshire. The Austens were a Kent family, originally one of those aristocratic clothworkers who, possessing landed property in the Weald, did not disdain to work in wool, and who were generally known as “the Greycoats of Kent.” Mr. Austen Leigh, Jane Austen’s nephew, writes that a trace of the family origin survives in the family livery of light blue and white, called “Kentish Grey.”

Jane Austen’s father, an orphan, brought up by an uncle, a lawyer in Tunbridge, was, in succession, a scholar at Tunbridge School, a fellow of St. John’s, Oxford, and rector of the two livings of Deane and Steventon, Hampshire villages little more than a mile apart, and numbering a united population of not more than three hundred.

The young rector married Cassandra Leigh, a daughter of the incumbent of Harpenden, near Henley-on-the-Thames. The Leighs were a Warwickshire family, descended, on the mother’s side, from the Chandos house. Jane Austen’s grand-uncle, Dr. Theophilus Leigh, was Master of Balliol College for upwards of half a century. I mention him because he was a man famous in his day for ready repartee, and it is possible his wit may have descended to his grand-niece Jane.

For thirty years the Austens resided at Steventon; and there Jane Austen spent, for the most part, the first twenty-five years of her life, in a quiet country circle, certainly not without its cultured members, among whom was her father, a scholarly and accomplished man.

When Mr. and Mrs. Austen were still a young couple, they were entrusted with the charge of a son of Warren Hastings, but the child died in infancy; otherwise we might have had a long train of life-like[Pg 4] Anglo-Indians in fiction, many years before they were conjured into existence by Thackeray.

The next parish to Steventon was Ashe, of which the clergyman then happened to be Dr. Russell, grand-father of Mary Russell Mitford.

The Rev. George Austen was so good-looking a man, from youth to age, as to have been called “the handsome proctor” at Oxford, and to be still noticed at Bath, when he was over seventy years of age, on account of his fine features and abundance of snow-white hair. I have already said he was a man of ability. He directed the studies of all his children, and increased his income by the practice, usual with clergymen, of taking pupils. Mrs. Austen was also reputed a clever woman, endowed with a lively imagination, in addition to much good sense.

Jane Austen’s biographer says rightly, the members of her own family were so much to her, and the rest of the world so little, that a brief sketch of her brothers and sister is necessary, to furnish a complete idea of her life. He remarks elsewhere, in alluding to the retirement in which she generally dwelt, that she had probably never been in company with anybody of greater literary ability and reputation than herself. In these observations, he touches inadvertently on what I think formed the root of the defects—to which I shall refer afterwards—in an otherwise fine character.

Jane Austen had five brothers and one sister. James, the eldest of the family, and the father of Jane’s biographer, is described as well read in English literature, writing readily and happily both in prose and verse. When yet a young man at Oxford, he originated a periodical called the “Loiterer,” and by his example may have turned Jane’s attention to authorship. He was a clergyman, and succeeded his father at Steventon. Edward Austen was early adopted by his cousin, Mr. Knight, of Godmersham Park, in Kent, and Chawton House, in Hampshire. He adopted the name of Knight, and was, like Frank Churchill in[Pg 5] “Emma,” a good deal separated from his family in their youth. But it was to his neighbourhood, and to the support of his position as the squire of the parish, that the women of the Austen family returned at last. This brother Edward is said to have been full of amiability and fun. He seems to have borne some resemblance in his character, as well as in his circumstances, to the Frank Churchill of Jane’s story.

Henry Austen was a good talker, but he was the least successful of the brothers. While he resided in London, he appears to have been the literary authority, and the means of communication between his sister Jane and her publishers.

Francis and Charles Austen were both sailors, and both lived to become admirals. Francis possessed a firm temper and a strong sense of duty. He was distinguished by his religious principles at a time when a religious profession was rare in the service. At one station he was pointed out as “the officer who knelt in church.” Charles—specially beloved in his family for the sweet temper and affectionate disposition which resembled Jane’s—was, on one occasion, seven consecutive years absent from England on active service. He died of cholera in the course of the Burmese war, Lord Dalhousie expressing his admiration of the staunch, high spirit which, notwithstanding his age (seventy-four) and previous sufferings, had led the admiral to take his part in the trying service that closed his career.

Cassandra Austen was three years Jane’s senior. The warmest affection subsisted between the two, Jane, in her maturity and fame, continuing to look up to her elder sister, a beautiful, staid, thoughtful woman from her girlhood. When Cassandra was sent to the school of a Mrs. Latourville (probably a French émigrée), in the Forbury of Reading, Jane went with her, not because she was old enough, but because she would have been miserable without her sister, her mother observing “that if Cassandra were going to have her head cut off, Jane would insist on sharing her fate.”

[Pg 6]

Steventon was one of those villages and parsonages which Jane Austen so often described. “It was situated among the low chalk hills and winding lanes of North Hants. The parsonage house stood in a shallow valley, surrounded by sloping meadows well sprinkled with elm-trees, at the end of a small village of cottages, each provided with a garden, scattered about prettily on either side of the road.” Within the house, though it was reckoned rather above the average of the parsonages of its day, no cornice marked the junction of wall and ceiling, while the beams which supported the upper floors projected into the rooms below in all their naked simplicity, covered only by a coat of paint or whitewash. About five years after Jane Austen’s death, her old home at Steventon was pulled down.

“At the front of the house was a carriage-drive through turf and trees. On the south side the ground rose gently, and was occupied by an old-fashioned garden, in which flowers and vegetables kept each other company, flanked on the east by a thatched mud wall, and overshadowed by fine elms. Along the upper side of the garden ran a terrace of fine turf, where Jane in her childhood might have emulated young Catherine Morland in rolling down the green slope.”

Mr. Austen Leigh says the chief beauty of Steventon was in its hedgerows—borders of copsewood and timber, often wide enough to contain a winding footpath or rough cart-track. “There the earliest primroses, anemones, and wild hyacinths were to be found, the first bird’s-nest, and sometimes an unwelcome adder.” Two such hedgerows radiated from the parsonage garden. One, a continuation of the turf terrace, ran westward, and formed the boundary of the home meadows. It was made into a rustic shrubbery, with occasional seats, and was called, in the sentimental language of the day, “the Wood Walk.” No doubt Jane Austen often strolled or sat there, alone, or with her sister, or one of her brothers. She might carry there her little work-box, or the volume of “Evelina,” or “Cecilia,” the[Pg 7] “Mysteries of Udolpho,” or the “Romance of the Forest,” which she was devouring. It was to such a shrubbery or “wilderness” that she sent Elizabeth Bennet to seek her father—to read an important letter—or to hold her famous interview with Lady Catherine de Bourgh.

The other hedgerow bore the name of “the Church Walk,” because it climbed the hill to the parish church, near which, surrounded by sycamores, was a manor-house of Henry VIII.’s time, tenanted for upwards of a hundred years by a yeoman family bearing the appropriate name of Digweed.

The little church without a spire, with its narrow early English windows, is said to have been upwards of seven hundred years old.[1] Sweet violets, purple and white, grew in profusion beneath the south wall. The churchyard had its hollow yew coeval with the church, its old elms and thorns among its mossy stones and green mounds.

We hear many regrets in our day for the demolition of the old church of Haworth, in which the Brontë family worshipped, that may very likely be followed by the destruction of the old parsonage house. Jane Austen’s admirers, though they are choice spirits and cannot be denied the merit of fidelity, have not been so enthusiastic. I do not know that one protesting voice was raised when the iconoclast’s changes and improvements reached the peaceful old parish. I am not sure whether many pilgrims ever sought that birthplace, and as to those who have visited the grave in Winchester Cathedral, we have Mr. Austen Leigh’s authority for the statement that they drew from the verger the puzzled inquiry—what was there particular about the lady buried there that people should come and ask to see her resting-place? No: Jane Austen and her work must always be regarded in one of two lights—that of quiet[Pg 8] though intense appreciation, or that of puzzled non-comprehension.

The large family at Steventon were worthy, prosperous, and happy. They had in some respects the position and privileges of the family of the principal squire, as well as the rector of the parish, since the Rev. George Austen represented the absentee cousin, of whom the clergyman’s second son was the adopted son and heir. The Austens kept a carriage and pair of horses, and lived in a style equal to that of the neighbouring county gentry, whose near relatives or intimate friends the household at the parsonage were. In reckoning up the special advantages of such a home in one of her novels, Jane Austen lays stress on its being well connected, “a well connected parsonage.”

Among the most frequent visitors at Steventon were two families of cousins, who could both of them bring fresh experiences to the country parsonage. The one family, the Coopers, lived in the brilliant Bath of their generation, where Cassandra and Jane Austen, as young women, visited their relations long before they ever thought of Bath as a residence for themselves. Jane was still able to enjoy the gay watering-place with the keen appetite of a country-bred girl, and it is these vivid reminiscences which she transfers to the pages of “Northanger Abbey,” while she reserves the much more sober, rather adverse estimate of later years for the concluding chapters of “Persuasion.” One of these cousins, Jane Austen’s dear friend and namesake, was married from her uncle’s house at Steventon to a captain in the navy, under whom Charles Austen served. A few years afterwards, this favourite cousin was suddenly killed in a carriage accident.

Another cousin had been brought up in Paris, and had married a Count de Feuillade, who was guillotined during the French Revolution. His widow escaped through many perils, took refuge in her uncle’s parsonage of Steventon, and ended by marrying her cousin Henry Austen, with whom she went to France, during the short Peace of Amiens, in 1802, and narrowly[Pg 9] escaped being detained among the unfortunate English prisoners of war, by Napoleon.

Thus the quiet Hampshire parsonage was not entirely without its excitements, in addition to the arrivals and departures of its sailor sons, the naval battles and sieges in which they were engaged, the ship-intelligence which was always eagerly scanned on their behalf. Had the future author been so disposed, she might have found in the conversation and adventures of her cousin and sister-in-law materials for novels which would have been more to the taste of a large section of the public than Jane Austen’s perfect tales. As it was, the chief immediate results of the young widowed countess’s stay at Steventon, when Jane Austen was just entering on her teens, were the improvement of the family French, and the performance of amateur theatricals in a summer theatre in the barn and a winter theatre in the little dining-room. Out of these theatricals Jane Austen made stock for “Mansfield Park,” in which, by the way, she infers decided disapproval of the amusement. Whether or not the real theatricals led to the attachment and engagement of Henry Austen and Madame de Feuillade we may conjecture, but cannot ascertain from Mr. Austen Leigh’s narrative.

Jane Austen’s biographer writes of the Austens’ long stay at Steventon as having remained unshadowed by any serious family misfortune or death. But one great disaster, which, though it did not concern Jane directly, touched her nearly, befell a member of the family. Cassandra Austen, more regularly beautiful than Jane, wise for her years, and good, was engaged to be married to a young clergyman who had a prospect of early preferment from a nobleman, his relative and friend. The two men went together to the West Indies, the one to act for a time as chaplain to the regiment of the other. Very soon the chaplain died of yellow fever. The melancholy news, descending like a thunderbolt on the cheerful Hampshire parsonage, brought great grief to Cassandra Austen, and Jane was certain to suffer with her sister.

[Pg 10]

II.
In person Jane Austen seems to have borne considerable resemblance to her two favourite heroines, Elizabeth Bennet and Emma Woodhouse. Jane, too, was tall and slender, a brunette, with a rich colour—altogether “the picture of health” which Emma Woodhouse was said to be. In minor points, Jane Austen had a well-formed though somewhat small nose and mouth, round as well as rosy cheeks, bright hazel eyes, and brown hair, falling in natural curls about her face.

With regard to her knowledge and accomplishments, Jane Austen was well acquainted with the English history and literature of her day. When very young she was an ardent partisan of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Charles I., though one may be tolerably sure she modified her views in later years. She read the Queen Anne essayists and their followers. She was a warm admirer of the works of Johnson, Crabbe, and Cowper. Of Crabbe she said jestingly, in reference to the author—not the man, whom she had not seen—that if she ever married at all she could fancy herself Mrs. Crabbe. She knew Richardson’s novels almost by heart. She had great pleasure in Sir Walter Scott’s poetry. Of his novels, only “Waverley,” “Guy Mannering,” and “The Antiquary” had come out before her death. She has expressed more than once in her tales her lively appreciation of the novels of Mrs. Radcliffe, Madame d’Arblay, and Miss Edgeworth.

As to foreign languages and literature, Jane Austen had a considerable knowledge of French, and a slight acquaintance with Italian. In music she could play and sing pleasantly, with much the same degree of proficiency that she attributed to Elizabeth Bennet and Emma Woodhouse. Jane was accustomed to practise her music before breakfast, with the laudable purpose of not disturbing other members of the family[Pg 11] less musically inclined. She would sing of an evening, when required, simple old songs to her own accompaniment. She was fond of dancing, and danced very well, like several of her own heroines, and like her sister-author, Anna Maria Porter.

Jane Austen was exceedingly neat-handed, with a quick eye and a firm grasp. Her handwriting was at once strong and fine, as well as very legible,[2] I should say, in broad contrast to what may be called the Italian hand—an overflow of characterless elegance which belonged to the generation. She sewed and embroidered, as she did everything else, with exquisite finish. She was great in satin-stitch. She spent much of her time in sewing—not being above making her own clothes, as well as those of the poor. She was an adept in any of the old-fashioned games founded on dexterity of hand, such as spillikins, and cup and ball. She liked to play at such games when unable to read and write long at a time, from weakness and weariness in those bright, searching eyes of hers.

The great novelist was very fond of children, and much beloved by them, like Anna Maria Porter again. She could tell no end of fairy stories, was the make-believe visitor in the children’s make-believe houses, and readily improvised for her young listeners’ benefit.

Jane Austen was not without suitors, whom her independent spirit, absorption in her family, and quiet reserve could not repel. Her descendants were aware of addresses paid to her by one gentleman who had every recommendation of character, connections, and position, to whom nothing was wanting save the lady’s favour. There is also the lingering recollection of a sorrowful little romance, bearing a resemblance to that of her sister Cassandra, in connection with the brilliant, witty, successful author. It was told by Cassandra Austen to her young relatives long after Jane’s death.[Pg 12] The two girls, while spending some weeks during their youth at a seaside place, became acquainted with a gentleman whose attractions of person, mind, and manners made even Cassandra think him worthy of Jane, and likely to win her. When the young people parted, the new friend expressed his intention of soon seeing the sisters again, and Cassandra at least had no doubt of his motives; but the second meeting never took place. The sisters heard, not long afterwards, of the gentleman’s sudden death, and with him perished, in Cassandra Austen’s opinion, her sister Jane’s solitary, short love-dream.

III.
Jane Austen wrote stories, in addition to all manner of quips and cranks, impromptu verses, and mocking stanzas, from her childhood upwards. In admitting the childish practice, after she was a middle-aged woman, she called it an innocent amusement, but a waste of time which, as she had found to her regret, might have been more profitably employed. She had accumulated numerous copies, full of such stories—for the most part burlesques of the melodramatic extravagances of other writers—by the time she was sixteen. The published story which is nearest to this style is “Northanger Abbey.” She seems to have completed two stories, which were not parodies, between the age of sixteen and twenty. Both of these were in the old-fashioned form of letters. One of them she re-wrote, in another shape, and it was ultimately published under the title of “Sense and Sensibility.” The other, “Lady Susan,” was only published along with the little memoir of the author, nine years ago.

[Pg 13]

Two among her masterpieces were written between her twenty-first and twenty-third years. “Pride and Prejudice,” named originally “First Impressions,” was written in ten months, between 1796 and 1797; “Sense and Sensibility,” the reproduction from the earlier story, in letters, called “Ellinor and Marianne,” occupied the author between 1797 and 1798; but “Northanger Abbey,” which holds a place beside “Pride and Prejudice,” was written also in 1798.

Jane Austen wrote with the knowledge and approval of her father and mother and the rest of her family. There is still in existence a letter written by Mr. Austen and addressed to Mr. Cadell, in November, 1797, immediately after the completion of “Pride and Prejudice.” The father simply states that he has in his possession a MS. novel in three volumes, about the length of Miss Burney’s “Evelina.” He asks whether Mr. Cadell would choose to be concerned in bringing it out, what would be the expense of publishing if at the author’s risk, and what the publisher would venture to advance for the copyright if, on perusal, it was approved of.

The proposal was declined by return of post, more from excess of caution than from erring criticism, since the MS. was never in the publisher’s hands. It is almost needless to say that the rejected novel has been considered the best, as it is unquestionably among the best, of English novels.

“Pride and Prejudice” was not published till sixteen years after it had been composed; “Sense and Sensibility,” the first published of Jane Austen’s novels, not for thirteen years after the first time it was re-written. “Northanger Abbey” was the first sold of these earlier novels, but it cannot be considered more lucky than its predecessors. Its fate was, if possible, still more mortifying. It was disposed of to a publisher in Bath for the modest sum of ten pounds, five years after it was written, and two years before the death of Jane Austen’s father. It lay ignominiously in a drawer in the shop of its purchaser for many years. At last it was bought[Pg 14] back for the sum originally given, by one of the author’s brothers, who, when the transaction was finished, triumphantly informed the dilatory publisher that he had just re-sold a work by the well-known author of “Pride and Prejudice.” “Northanger Abbey,” on which Lord Macaulay set such store, was not brought out till 1818, after Jane Austen’s death, when it appeared together with her last story, “Persuasion,” just twenty years from the date at which the former novel was written. Surely, few young authors have had to suffer greater and more prolonged disappointment in finding a publisher and a public. The experience may serve as a consolation to all struggling literary aspirants. On the other hand we may seek generation after generation of authors doomed to obscurity, temporary or permanent, before we find another Jane Austen. Of a nephew and a niece of the author’s who took to youthful novel-writing in their aunt’s lifetime, and received all indulgence and encouragement from their kinswoman, it is recorded that neither of their novels ever saw the light; yet we might have said of them that they had novel-writing in the blood. One of them wrote with the inspiring association of dwelling in Steventon Parsonage, the other received invaluable hints and suggestions from a mistress of her art; but it was all of no avail.

It is said that Jane Austen bore her early literary disappointments very philosophically. She did not write for money; her father was in easy circumstances. She might not then anticipate fame—though she was far from undervaluing her powers—and she did not over-rate the worth of a literary reputation; still I can scarcely comprehend the equanimity of a very young woman remaining entirely unshaken by the unbroken train of undeserved failures and rebuffs. There is one thing that I feel sure Jane Austen must have grieved for:—her father, who had superintended her education, and taken a fatherly interest in her first attempts at authorship, did not live to see the faint dawn of[Pg 15] the success which, though it came late, has proved ample.

Before quitting the subject of the novelist’s youth at Steventon, I should like to say a word on the influences already referred to, which I believe affected her as a woman and an author. During her whole life she remained to a great extent engrossed by the interests of her family and their limited circle of old and intimate friends. This was as it should be—so far, but there may be too much of a good thing. The tendency of strictly restricted family parties and sets—when their members are above small bickerings and squabblings—when they are really superior people in every sense, is to form “mutual admiration” societies, and neither does this more respectable and amiable weakness act beneficially upon its victims. In the incessant intercourse between the Great House and Upper Cross Cottage in “Persuasion,” we have an example, under Jane Austen’s own hand, of the evils of such constant communication among people of inferior understanding and intelligence. If we look nearer home, we may have a glimpse of disadvantages of a different sort, attendant on what Scotch people call “clannishness” in a higher region. Good as Jane Austen was, there is a certain spirit of exclusiveness, intolerance, condescension, and what may be classed as refined family selfishness, in the attitude which she, the happy member of a large and united family, distinguished by many estimable qualities, assumed to the world without. She was independent of it to a large extent for social intercourse; and so she told it candidly, and just a little haughtily—forgetting, for the most part, the wants of less favoured individuals—that she needed nothing from it.

Fondly loved and remembered as Jane Austen has been, with much reason, among her own people, in their considerable ramifications, I cannot imagine her as greatly liked, or even regarded with anything save some amount of prejudice, out of the immediate circle of her friends, and in general society. I hope I may not be[Pg 16] misunderstood. I do not mean that the novelist was other than an excellent woman, pre-eminently a gentlewoman. What I mean is, that she allowed her interests and sympathies to become narrow, even for her day, and that her tender charity not only began, but ended, in a large measure, at home. No doubt I am alluding to the characteristics of a generation and class, which showed themselves, in a marked manner, in the repugnance with which other intellectual gentlewomen shrank from acknowledging the profession of authorship, with its obligations, no less than its privileges, as if it involved a degradation—something distinctly injurious to them, both as women and gentlewomen. Fanny Burney, on the other hand, was brought up among artists of every description, which, perhaps, accounts for the transparent literary vanity which forms so broad a contrast to the shyness—often equally self-conscious—of her sister-authors. But the whole bent of Jane Austen’s disposition and rearing seem to point in the contrary direction.

Jane Austen was the clear-sighted girl with the sharp pen, if not the sharp tongue, who found in the Steventon visiting-list materials for the dramatis personæ of “Pride and Prejudice.” It would have been little short of a miracle if she could have conducted herself with such meekness, in her remote rural world, or during the visits she paid to the great English watering-place—while she was all the time laughing in her sleeve—so as not to provoke any suspicion of her satire, or any resentment at what might easily be held her presumption.

We may grant fully that Jane Austen was far too good an artist to make absolute copies from real persons to figure in the pages of her books, and too good a woman not to regard such a practice as a breach of social honour and propriety. But we all know how human beings—especially the duller among us, distrust and dislike being turned into ridicule. “A chiel amang us takin’ notes” is not half so offensive as an[Pg 17] audacious boy or girl convicted of taking us off, whether behind our backs or to our faces. I do not mean to infer that Miss Austen at any age was guilty of the mean and disloyal practice called “drawing out people” until they expose their weakness, and then making game of the weaknesses, whether in the victim’s company or out of it. I have it on excellent authority that, however thoroughly she was able to sympathise with the witty repartees of two of her favourite heroines, in general company she herself was shy and silent; even in more familiar circles she was innocent of speaking sharp words, and was rather distinguished for her tolerant indulgence to her fellow-creatures, than for her hard judgments on them. The tolerance belonged, by right, to her breadth of comprehension, and to the humour which still more than wit characterised her genius. The suggestion I make is that, seeing her neighbours’ foibles, as she certainly did see them, she could not, however generously she might use her superior knowledge, conceal it altogether from her neighbours, and this was less likely to be the case when she was a young girl with some share, presumably, of the thoughtlessness and rashness of other girls, than when she was a mature woman, with the wisdom and gentleness of experience. I have pointed out the softened as well as the more serious tone of her later novels, the difference, for instance, between “Northanger Abbey” and “Persuasion.” But who is to guess that the boy or the girl is to turn out a great novelist and humourist, whose genius is a fire in the bones, and an excuse for a hundred liberties?

As an author, in the few letters that have been preserved in which we have Jane Austen’s private feelings on the subject of her novels frankly written to her family and friends, she gives one the impression of having always found herself the queen of her company: never in an arrogant, vulgar way; on the contrary, with a sweet playfulness and gracious kindness to those who were closely allied to her by kindred,[Pg 18] blood, and the ties of friendship; but all the same she reigned queen. She might come down from her throne and defer to her elder sister Cassandra, or to any other relative, but her sceptre was still in her hand. I do not draw inferences merely from Jane Austen’s hearty, undissembled appreciation of her own work, and her distinct perception, freely announced, of its superior claims; doubtless that was inevitable to such a woman as she was, in the circumstances in which she found herself. It is in the whole assured tone of the half-jesting criticism; the half-pretended impatience that any new great novelist should enter the lists; the total absence—as in the case of Mrs. Radcliffe—of any natural desire to know and be known by her fellow-writers, to measure herself in familiar intercourse with them, above all, to give and receive sympathy.

Of course these peculiarities in the individual woman were not enough to hinder her from admiring at a distance, and occasionally generously proclaiming the admiration for, some of her contemporaries. I am bound also, in fairness, to add to my own impressions that it remained the firm persuasion of Jane Austen’s biographer that she was as far as possible from being censorious and satirical. With regard to the censoriousness, I agree perfectly with this witness; but as to the satire, I must bring forward the opposite and impartial testimony of her own writings. Jane Austen was on the whole more humorous than satirical, yet in the earlier novels the satire is prominent. I can give far more unqualified credence to the statement that, while her unusually quick sense of the ridiculous led her to play with all the common-places of every-day life—whether as regarded persons or things—she never played with its serious duties or responsibilities.

With all her neighbours in the village—her humbler neighbours, I suppose—Mr. Austen Leigh says she was on friendly though not on intimate terms, “She took a kindly interest in all their proceedings, and liked to hear about them. They often served for her amusement,[Pg 19] but it was her own nonsense that gave zest to the gossip.” The last is a nice distinction, hardly likely to be understood by the neighbours over whose affairs she laughed.

That Jane Austen, with her singular Shakespeare-like sympathy in little, her power of putting herself in another’s place, could not help feeling both interested and entertained by the proceedings of the fellow-creatures around her, I can easily believe. What I doubt is that she who turned those simple souls, and the incidents of their lives, inside out, for her mingled instruction and diversion, could altogether conceal the process, or render it palatable to the subjects of the operation.

It was the conviction of the Austen family that Jane’s occupation as a novel writer continued long unsuspected by her ordinary acquaintances and neighbours. That may have been, but we cannot imagine that her close study of the characters around her, with her shrewd, humorous conclusions—so extraordinary at the age at which she began to make them—could have been either quite unperceived or wholly approved of by her associates.

There are one or two of Jane Austen’s letters from Steventon published in her memoir. They are bright, chatty letters, not far removed from those which any merry-hearted, clever girl might have written. They deal entirely with domestic and local details. The arrival of a set of tables, with which everybody, for a wonder, was pleased; a great November storm, that made havoc among the Parsonage trees; an accident to a neighbour’s son; an anticipated ball; the fact that Jane was then reading Hume’s “History of England,” form the topics. As there is no continuity, either in the letters or the narrative, of which such incidents might supply a part, they fall vaguely and flatly on the reader. The most interesting paragraphs are those which refer to the absent sailor brothers, and the eagerness of the mother and sisters to hear stray news of them, or to forward[Pg 20] letters to them, and procure answering letters by the chances of coming and going ships. There is one passage which tallies with the details of a gift made in “Mansfield Park”:—“Charles has received thirty pounds for his share of the privateer, and expects ten pounds more; but of what avail is it to take prizes if he lays out the produce in presents to his sisters? He has been buying gold chains and topaz crosses for us. He must be well scolded.... I shall write again by this post to thank and reproach him. We shall be unbearably fine.”

IV.
During an absence from home on Jane Austen’s part, it was settled, before she knew, that her father, who at the age of seventy had resigned his living of Steventon to his son James, should remove with his wife and daughters to Bath. However much Jane may have felt the fascination of her girlish visits to Bath, she did not approve of it as a place of residence in her more mature womanhood. We are reminded of a sentence in “Persuasion” where the author remarks drily Anne Elliot did not like Bath; fancied it disagreed with her; would have preferred any other place; therefore, to Bath, as a matter of course, the family went. So much for the unpropitiousness of events.

The Austens went to Bath in 1801, when Jane was twenty-six years of age. The family resided first at No. 4, Sydney Terrace, and later at Green Park Buildings. An attraction to Bath, suggested by Mr. Austen Leigh, is that Mrs. Austen’s only brother, Mr. Leigh Perrot,[3] with his wife, was in the habit of spending his[Pg 21] time between Bath and his place of Scarletts. Like his uncle, the Master of Balliol, Mr. Leigh Perrot was a witty man, and some of his epigrams and riddles, in which he must have far outshone Mr. Woodhouse, found their way, among other morsels, into print. The Austens, with their strong family proclivities, were much with the Leigh Perrots.

Jane was still young, pretty, and cheerful enough to enter with a fair proportion of enjoyment into the gaieties of the place. She had given up writing, in a great measure, since she was three or four and twenty, whether chilled by her lack of success or distracted by other engagements and amusements. However, it is thought that it was during her stay in Bath she wrote several chapters of an unfinished novel called “The Watsons,” which, unlike the youthful performance, “Lady Susan,” published along with these chapters in the same volume with the memoir, bear a strong flavour of Jane Austen in her sagacity and banter.

She may have been inspirited to the effort by the sale, though for so small a sum, of the MS. of “Northanger Abbey,” which happened two years after she came to Bath, when she was twenty-eight years of age. We know the sale proved fruitless, so far as speedy publication was concerned, but the mortifying conclusion could not have been foreseen, and the sale of one of her novels for ten pounds was Jane Austen’s first faint gleam of good fortune in authorship, the only one which visited her during her father’s lifetime.

The Austens remained at Bath about four years. In their last autumn there, the autumn of 1804, Jane, with her father and mother, spent some weeks at the lovely sea-bathing place of Lyme, which she admired so much, and has immortalised in “Persuasion.” We cannot avoid being struck by the small number of the opportunities which Jane Austen had of seeing the world, and by the great use she made of them. Her journeyings were not so very much more extensive than those of the Vicar of Wakefield and his wife in the days[Pg 22] of their prosperity, but they were sufficient for her to avail herself of them for the information and delight of her fellow-creatures. It is not the amount of what we see, but the eyes with which we see it, that signifies.

In the following spring, that of 1805, the Rev. George Austen died at Bath. His widow and daughters then removed to Southampton—drawn to its society very likely by the sailor Austens—and there they stayed for four more years. Mrs. Austen occupied a large old-fashioned house in a corner of Castle Square. The house had a pleasant garden, bounded on one side by the old city wall. A flight of steps led to the top of the wall, which formed a walk with an extensive view of sea and land.

V.
In 1809 the Austens made their last removal. It was back to the country—of which Jane always makes her heroines fond—back to the old neighbourhood of Steventon, her birth-place. Edward Knight offered his mother a choice of two houses—the one on his estate in Kent, the other on his estate in Hampshire. She selected the house in Hampshire, Chawton Cottage, near the squire’s occasional home, Chawton House.

Chawton Cottage, in the village of the same name, was not originally a farm house, like Upper Cross Cottage, in “Persuasion;” it had been intended for an inn. Indeed, it stood so close to the high road on which the front door opened, that a very narrow enclosure “paled” in on each side had been necessary to protect the building from the danger of collision with runaway vehicles. In addition to the Gosport Road in front, the Winchester Road skirted the house on one side, so that it could not be regarded as a secluded habitation, but in those days cheerfulness was more prized than seclusion.[Pg 23] There was a large pond close to Chawton Cottage, at the junction of the two public roads. Happily the theory which connects insalubrity with such ponds had not yet been aired, so that to the Austens, no doubt, Chawton pond was a very desirable sheet of water, tending still more to enhance the attractions of the scene. They would not much mind the duckweed and other slimy vegetation. Horses and donkeys, ducks and geese, would disport themselves there in summer. In winter village sliders would bestow animation on the ice.

The squire added to the house, and contrived some judicious planting and screening. A good-sized entrance and two sitting-rooms were managed. In the drawing-room a window which looked to the Gosport Road was blocked up and turned into a bookcase, and another window was opened out and made to command only turf and trees, for a high wooden fence and a hornbeam hedge shut out the Winchester Road. Here was a little bit of genteel privacy. A shrubbery was carried round the enclosure, which Mr. Austen Leigh tells us gave a sufficient space for “ladies’ exercise,” though we cannot help thinking the exercise-ground must have been rather limited for the middle-aged women.

However, there was a pleasant irregular mixture of hedgerow, gravel-walk, and orchard, with grass for mowing, made by two or three little enclosures having been thrown together. As it happened, walking had to be relinquished before many years by the younger sister, and Jane Austen, as well as her mother, had to resort to a donkey-carriage for exercise.

Altogether Chawton Cottage was “quite as good as the generality of parsonages, and nearly in the same style.” It was capable of receiving other members of the family as frequent visitors. In this respect it must have contrasted favourably in Jane’s mind with the cottage in which she had established Ellinor and Marianne Dashwood with their mother, in “Sense and Sensibility.” Chawton Cottage was sufficiently well[Pg 24] furnished.[4] Altogether it formed a comfortable and “lady-like” establishment for a family of ladies whose means were not large. To Jane Austen it was her own house, among her own people, points which meant a great deal to her. Besides, she was a woman possessed at once of too much self-respect and self-resource, and of too serene a spirit and lively a temper to care much either for outward show or interior luxury.

Jane Austen was thirty-four years of age when she settled down at Chawton, her sister Cassandra was thirty-seven, their mother seventy. They were a household of old and middle-aged women, increased either then or a little later by a family connection—a Miss Lloyd—who lived with the Austens. Their prospects were as clearly defined as earthly prospects could well be, and they accepted the definition. Jane Austen was never seen without a cap, either in the morning or the evening, after she went to Chawton. The Austen sisters assumed early the caps which were then the mark of matronhood or confirmed spinsterhood. Possibly Cassandra Austen first adopted the badge as a quiet sign that she wished to have nothing more to do with love and marriage, and Jane bore her faithful company in this as in everything else. Mr. Austen Leigh mentions also—and every trifle is welcome which bears on the novelist’s character and habits—it was held that his aunts, though remarkably neat in their dress, as in all their ways, were not sufficiently attentive to the fashionable or the becoming. In short, Jane and Cassandra Austen, though they had been the young beauties of Steventon in their time, entertained no fear of being styled dowdies or frights in their middle age, whether by their young relatives or the “dressy” among their contemporaries.

The Austens dwelt in the centre of family interests, several members of the old Steventon household living[Pg 25] near, while a younger generation was growing up, with fresh claims on the affectionate sympathies of their grandmother and aunts. In her family and among her old friends Jane Austen was unsurpassed as a tender sick-nurse, an untiring confidante, and a wise counsellor.

In these congenial circumstances it seemed as if a fresh spring of courage and hopefulness, and with them renewed inspiration in her art, came to the author. She began the very year of her arrival at Chawton to revise and prepare her old MSS. for publication. She had found a publisher in a Mr. Egerton, and she brought out in succession two novels—the first, “Sense and Sensibility,” when she was thirty-six years of age, in 1811, fourteen or fifteen years after it was re-written at Steventon. She got for it, though after how short or long an interval, or by what arrangement, we are not told, a hundred and fifty pounds. In her gay way she exclaimed at so large a reward for what had cost her nothing—nothing save genius, ungrudging trouble, and long patience. “Pride and Prejudice” was published two years later, in 1813.

In the meantime Jane Austen began fresh work, for “Mansfield Park” was commenced the year before. She had no separate study; she worked in the family sitting-room, undisturbed by the conversation, or the various occupations going on around her, and subjected to all kinds of interruptions. She wrote at a little mahogany writing-desk, on small pieces of paper, which could be easily put aside, or covered with blotting-paper at the sight of visitors. But it would be a great mistake to suppose that she did not take the greatest pains with her work. She wrote and re-wrote, filed and polished; her own comparison for the process was painting on a few inches of ivory by repeated touches.

“Pride and Prejudice” attracted attention before long.[Pg 26][5] When the secret of the authorship became known, in spite of the author’s name being omitted on the title-page, Jane Austen’s experience was that of a prophet who has no honour in his own country. Mr. Austen Leigh says that any praise which reached the author and her family from their neighbours and acquaintances was of the mildest description, and that those excellent people would have considered Miss Jane’s relatives mad if it had been suspected that they put her, in their own minds, on a level with Madame d’Arblay or even with far inferior writers. A letter is given in which the novelist describes to her sister Cassandra in the liveliest terms her feelings on seeing “Pride and Prejudice” in print. She had got her own darling child from London. The advertisement of it had appeared in their paper that day for the first time. Eighteen shillings! She should ask a guinea for her two next, and twenty-eight shillings for her stupidest of all.

A friend who was not in the secret had dined at Chawton Cottage on the very day of the book’s coming, and in the evening the family had fairly set to it and read half the first volume to her without her having any suspicion. “She was amused, poor soul!” observes the author, and then adds, with admirable naïveté, “That she could not help, you know, with two such characters to lead the way, but she really does seem to admire Elizabeth. I must confess that I think her as delightful a creature as ever appeared in print, and how I shall be able to tolerate those who do not like her at least, I do not know.”

In another letter Jane Austen refers to the second reading, which had not come off quite so well, and had even caused her some fits of disgust. She attributed the comparative failure to the rapid way in which her mother, who seemed to have been the reader, got on, and to her not being able to speak as the characters ought, though she understood them perfectly. When we recollect that the old lady was already seventy-four years of age, we[Pg 27] are rather astonished that she found voice and breath for such a labour of love as reading aloud her daughter’s novel, than that she was not able to give the dialogue with sufficient point. Upon the whole, the daughter winds up, she was quite vain enough and well satisfied enough, and the only fault which she found with her story was that it was rather too light, and bright, and sparkling; it wanted to be stretched here and there with a long chapter of sense, if it could be had, if not of solemn specious nonsense. Unquestionably the novelist was not plagued with diffidence, any more than with mock-modesty.

In the same letter she refers to an out-of-the-way book for a woman to read, with which she was then engaged; it was an “Essay on the Military Police, and Institutions of the British Empire, by Captain Pasley, of the Engineers.” She declared it was delightfully written, and highly entertaining, and that the author was the first soldier she had ever sighed for. The last assertion reminds one of Jane Austen’s strong preference for the sister service, which may be best explained by the circumstance that she had two brothers in the navy, and none in the army. Her heroes are squires, clergymen, and sailors, just as the male Austens were. She uses their Christian names, James, Henry, Frank, Edward, as well as her own. Her sister’s name was too singular and conspicuous to be thus employed.

Another letter a year later, in 1814, supplies an account of a journey which Jane Austen made “post” to London, in company with her brother Henry, who read the MS. of “Mansfield Park” by the way. It sounds as if the brother and sister were themselves the bearers of the new work to the publisher, who brought it out the same year.

“Emma,” the heroine of which proved almost as great a favourite as Elizabeth Bennet with their author, was written and published two years later, in 1816. It was in connection with this, the last book of hers which Jane Austen lived to see come out, that she received[Pg 28] what her nephew calls the only mark of distinction ever bestowed upon her. She was in London during the previous autumn of 1815, the year of Waterloo, nursing her brother Henry through a dangerous illness, in his house in Hans Place. Henry Austen was attended by one of the Prince Regent’s physicians. To this gentleman it became known that his patient’s nurse was the author of “Pride and Prejudice.” The court physician told the lady that the Prince was a great admirer of her novels; that he read them often, and kept a set in every one of his residences; that he himself had thought it right to inform his royal highness that Miss Austen was staying in London, and that the Prince had desired Mr. Clarke, the librarian at Carlton House, to wait upon her.

The next day Mr. Clarke made his appearance and invited Jane Austen to Carlton House, saying that he had the Prince’s instructions to show her the library,[6] and other apartments, and to pay her every possible attention. The invitation was of course accepted, and in the course of the visit to Carlton House Mr. Clarke declared himself commissioned to say that if Miss Austen had any other novel forthcoming, she was at liberty to dedicate it to the Prince. Accordingly, such a dedication was immediately prefixed to “Emma,” which was at that time in John Murray’s hands.

The first part of the civility, the invitation to Carlton House, was a gracious enough mark of attention from the first gentleman in Europe to the first lady novelist in his kingdom; but at this distance of time, in the full light enjoyed by posterity, it seems passing strange that two such women as Jane Austen and Jane Porter—equal in moral worth, though standing on very different intellectual heights—should have eagerly availed themselves of the permission to dedicate books to George IV., though he had been ten times the Prince Regent, and[Pg 29] the future king. And what is if possible stranger, is that the Prince Regent should have been, even professedly, an admiring, assiduous reader of the novels—altogether apart in literary merit, but alike in good tone and taste—of these two upright and blameless women. The fact is enough to tempt people to a disheartening doubt of the moral influence of books.

As a qualification to the pleasure derived from the princely compliment, Jane Austen had to suffer the annoyance of receiving and declining to comply with two rather preposterous suggestions offered to her by Mr. Clarke. The one was for her to pourtray the habits of life, character, and enthusiasm of a clergyman who should pass his time between London and the country, and who should bear some resemblance to Beattie’s Minstrel.

In a letter in which she thanks her correspondent for his praise of her novels, and expresses her anxiety that her fourth work might not disgrace what was good in the others, remarking she was haunted by the idea that the readers who have preferred “Pride and Prejudice” will think “Emma” inferior in wit; and those who have preferred “Mansfield Park” will consider the present novel deficient in sense, she demurely puts aside Mr. Clarke’s hint for her next story, on the plea that, though she might be equal to the comic part of it, the learned side of the clergyman would demand a classic education and an amount of acquaintance with ancient and modern literature that was far beyond her. Perhaps in self-defence from similar assaults, she concludes by boasting herself, “with all possible vanity, the most unlearned and uninformed female who ever dared to be an authoress.”

But the irrepressible Mr. Clarke was not to be deterred from his purpose of advising the novelist as to the direction of her talents. His second piece of advice was more startling and incongruous than his first. Prince Leopold was then on the eve of his marriage with Princess Charlotte. Mr. Clarke had had the good[Pg 30] fortune to be appointed Chaplain and private English Secretary to the Prince. The clergyman might have had a generous desire that another clergyman’s daughter should have the chance of sharing his good luck and assurance of preferment. Or he might have had a wish to procure a compliment for his last princely patron, and might have believed it was specially due from Jane Austen as a small return for the notice which the Prince Regent had condescended to take of her and her work. Mr. Clarke proposed that Miss Austen should write an historical novel illustrative of the august house of Cobourg,[7] which would just then be very interesting, and might very properly be dedicated to Prince Leopold. The date of the proposal brings vividly before us the deliberation with which public events were discussed in those days. For a public event to be dealt with now-a-days so as to take the tide of public interest at its height, an author would require to be as much in advance of the historical circumstance as publishers show themselves in their anticipation of Christmas. It would be necessary, in order that a novel founded on a royal marriage should command readers, that the author should be taken into what Mr. Clarke would have called the august confidence of the principals at the very first step of the negotiations, so that he might be able to bring out his work within twelve hours of the ceremony.

Jane Austen was not so profoundly honoured by the recommendation as Jane Porter felt when she set herself to comply with a royal wish that she should commemorate the first beginnings of the House of Brunswick.

After all, so-called historical novels were in Miss Porter’s way and not in Miss Austen’s. Mr. Austen Leigh speaks of the grave civility with which Jane Austen refused to make such an attempt. It seems to me that while she respectfully acknowledges the courtesies of Carlton House, and readily responds with answering friendliness to the friendly tone of Mr.[Pg 31] Clarke’s communication, there is considerable impatience and scorn in her merry but most decided dismissal of his ridiculous project. Even to her congratulations on his recent appointment she adds a sentence which has a suspicion of irony in it. “In my opinion,” she writes, “the service of a court can hardly be too well paid, for immense must be the sacrifice of time and feeling required by it.” She goes on to say, “You are very kind in your hints as to the sort of composition which might recommend me at present, and I am fully sensible that an historical romance, founded on the House of Saxe-Cobourg, might be much more to the purpose of profit or popularity than such pictures of domestic life in country villages as I deal in. But I could no more write a romance than an epic poem. I could not sit seriously down to write a serious romance under any other motive than to save my life; and if it were indispensable for me to keep it up, and never relax into laughing at myself or other people, I am sure I should be hung before I had finished the first chapter. No; I must keep to my own style, and go on in my own way; and though I may never succeed again in that, I am convinced that I should totally fail in any other.”

There is an anecdote of Jane Austen which coincides with her character, and has been widely circulated, though it is not mentioned by Mr. Austen Leigh. If it had a foundation in fact, it must have occurred either during this visit to London or in the course of that paid not long before. It is said that Miss Austen received an invitation to a rout given by an aristocratic couple with whom she was not previously acquainted. The reason assigned for the invitation was, that the author of “Pride and Prejudice” might be introduced to the author of “Corinne.” Tradition has it that the English novelist refused the invitation, saying, that to no house where she was not asked as Jane Austen would she go as the author of “Pride and Prejudice.”

The anecdote is often quoted with marks of admiration[Pg 32] for the author’s independence. But even the most honest and honourable independence has its becoming limits. That of Jane Austen, ultra self-sufficing, fastidious, tinged with haughtiness, is just a trifle repellant out of that small circle in which she was always at home.

Whether or not Madame de Staël was consulted about the proposed meeting, she was not an admirer of her sister author. The somewhat grandiloquent Frenchwoman characterised the productions of that English genius—which were the essence of common-sense—as “vulgaires,” precisely what they were not.

Apparently, Jane Austen was not one whit more accessible to English women of letters. There were many of deserved repute in or near London at the dates of these later visits. Not to speak of Mrs. Inchbald,[8] whom her correspondent, warm-hearted Maria Edgeworth, rejoiced to come to England and meet personally, there were the two Porters, Joanna Baillie—at the representation of whose fine play, The Family Legend, Sir Walter Scott and Lord Byron had lately “assisted”—and the veteran writer, Madame d’Arblay, whose creations were the object of Jane Austen’s early and late admiration. But we do not hear of a single overture towards acquaintance between Miss Austen and these ladies, though her work must have left as lively an impression on some of their minds as theirs had done on hers. Men of letters were no better known to her.

Jane Austen was destined to add only one more tale—and that a short, if charming story—to the list of her novels. In the course of 1816, she wrote “Persuasion,” which is not merely very good, in her own style, but possesses distinguishing excellences wanting in the others.[9]

[Pg 33]

Between February, 1811, and August, 1816, rather more than five years, Jane Austen wrote her three later novels, “Mansfield Park,” “Emma,” and “Persuasion”—pendants, as it were, to her three earlier works, “Pride and Prejudice,” “Sense and Sensibility,” and “Northanger Abbey,” belonging to 1796, ’97, and ’98—twenty years before. The author’s second period of composition was as productive as her first, if we take into consideration that “Sense and Sensibility” was simply an adaptation from a more juvenile story still.

Making allowance for the novelist’s strong individuality, there is an undoubted change in the tone. There are greater tolerance and tenderness especially noticeable in “Persuasion”—more thoughtfulness and earnestness in “Mansfield Park”—a perfection of composition which belongs peculiarly to “Emma.” All the three novels are distinguished by greater polish of the simple, vigorous diction, and a still more determined adherence to probability. The later novels may lack some amount of what Jane Austen herself defined as the sparkle of “Pride and Prejudice”—a sparkle which was often hard as well as bright; but the notion of any falling-off in power in the author would be absurd. There was an ample equivalent for anything she might have lost in fresh spontaneousness by what she had gained in reflection and feeling, and in delicacy of execution.

VI.
The shadow of what proved a mortal illness was already hanging over Jane Austen while she was working[Pg 34] at “Persuasion,” and this circumstance may help to account for a certain soft pensiveness in the book, in opposition to the author’s earlier unbroken, often hard, brilliance. But, as a proof that her high standard of literary excellence, and the pains which she did not grudge in order to attain it, had not abated, Mr. Austen Leigh tells us that, having ended her novel, “Persuasion,” she was dissatisfied with the close, and her dissatisfaction preyed on her mind to such a degree as to affect her usually cheerful spirits. She retired to bed one night quite depressed, but rose next morning with renewed energy and hope to make a fresh effort. She pulled down what she had done so far as to cancel the chapter containing the re-engagement of the hero and heroine, which she had pronounced flat and tame. She wrote two entirely new chapters—among the most delightful in the book—in its place. Instead of reconciling the couple at the Crofts’ lodgings, she brought the Musgroves and Captain Harville to Bath, and we know the result. Any one who has the least idea of the relief implied to a conscientious artist in the conclusion of a long thought out, long laboured at piece of work—the double relief when bodily health and spirits have failed under the task—will comprehend something of the devotion to her art and concern for her reputation which compelled the novelist thus to resume and re-construct her last scenes.

Struggling against illness as Jane Austen was from the earlier stages of the internal disease which ultimately proved fatal, in the January of 1817—the year in which she died—she began another tale, and wrote on—in spite of such bodily weakness that the last portions were first traced in pencil, though the quantity continued as great as twelve chapters in seven weeks—till the 17th of March, two months before she left Chawton not to return, and four months before her death. Mr. Austen Leigh mentions some family troubles in the spring of 1816, which his aunt took to heart, and which might have aggravated her complaint. I do not know whether these had anything to do with the persistent industry under adverse[Pg 35] circumstances; whether she might be anxious to contribute her share still, as she had been doing within the last few years, to the family income; or whether she might be prompted feverishly to seek the distraction from other cares afforded by mental work.

Certainly, those of Jane Austen’s letters which belong to this date are as lively as ever, and wittier than in her younger days. She wrote to a nephew in reference to the weather that it was really too bad, and had been too bad for a long time, much worse than any body could bear, and she began to think it would never be fine again. This was a finesse of hers, for she had often observed that if anybody wrote about the weather it was generally completely changed before the letter was read. She chaffed the Winchester boy on having first dated the letter from his father’s house at Steventon, and then given the superfluous information that he had returned home. She was glad that he had recollected to mention his being come home. Her heart had begun to sink within her when she had got so far through his letter without its being mentioned. She had been dreadfully afraid that he might have been detained at Winchester by some illness—confined to his bed, perhaps, and quite unable to hold a pen, and only dating from Steventon in order, with a mistaken sort of tenderness, to deceive her. But now she had no doubt of his being at home, she was sure he would not have said it so seriously unless it were so.

She changed the subject to describe countless post-chaises full of Winchester boys passing the cottage on their return home for their holidays—chaises full of future heroes, legislators, fools, and villains. Before he came to see his grandmother and aunts his mother must get well, he must go to Oxford, and not be elected. After that, a little change of scene might be good for him, and his physicians, she hoped, would order him to the sea, or to a house by the side of a very considerable pond.

In another letter to the same correspondent, Jane[Pg 36] Austen said that one reason of her writing was for the pleasure of directing to the young fellow as Esquire. She wished him joy on having left Winchester for good. Now he might own how miserable he had been there; now it would gradually all come out, his crimes and his miseries: how often he had gone up by the mail to London and thrown away fifty guineas at a tavern, and how often he had been on the point of hanging himself, restrained only, as some ill-natured person writing on poor Winton had it, by the want of a tree within some miles of the city.

This nephew, like one of the author’s nieces, appears to have been perpetrating a boyish attempt at a novel under the fascination of the favourite Aunt Jane’s vocation. There was some delightful banter from her on their common craft. After a brief allusion to his Uncle Henry’s very superior sermons, she proceeded to suggest that the budding novelist and herself ought to get hold of one or two and put them into their novels; it would be a fine help to a volume; they could make their heroines read them aloud on a Sunday evening, just as well as Isabella Wardlaw in the “Antiquary”[10] was made to read the history of the Hartz demon in the ruins of St. Ruth, though Jane believed on recollection Lovel was the reader. She was quite concerned for the loss the lad’s mother had mentioned in her letter. Two chapters and a half to be missing was monstrous. It was well that she had not been at Steventon lately, and therefore could not be suspected of purloining them; two strong twigs and a half towards a nest of her own would have been something. She did not think, however, that any theft of that sort would be really very useful to her. What could she have done with his strong, manly, vigorous sketches, full of variety and glow? How could she possibly have joined them on to the little bit (two inches wide) of ivory on which she worked with so fine a brush as produced little effect after much labour?

[Pg 37]

Jane Austen’s disease increased gradually, while she was spared much suffering. Her friends were not aware how soon or how late she apprehended the serious nature of her complaint. Her unselfishness and her buoyant temper alike inclined her to make light of any illness. An instance is given of her constant consideration for those around her. In the usual sitting-room at Chawton Cottage there was only one sofa, frequently occupied by Mrs. Austen, then in her seventy-eighth year. Jane, who was forced to lie down often, would never use the sofa, even in her mother’s absence. She contrived a sort of couch for herself with two or three chairs, and alleged that the arrangement was much more comfortable to her than a real sofa; but the importunity of a little niece drew from the invalid the private explanation that she believed if she herself had shown any inclination to use the sofa, her mother might have scrupled being on it so much as was good for her.

In a long letter to a friend, in the beginning of 1817, Jane wrote happily about herself, as having certainly gained strength during the winter, and being then not far from well. She thought she understood her case better than she had done, and ascribed her symptoms to biliousness, which could be kept off by care. After various bits of family news she finished the letter, then added in a postscript that the real object of the epistle was to ask her friend for a recipe, but she had thought it genteel not to let it appear early.

By April Jane Austen was seriously ill, and a young niece who had walked over with an elder sister to inquire for her aunt, received the impression of her as quite like an invalid. She was in her dressing-gown, sitting in an arm-chair, though she could get up and kindly greet the visitors. She was very pale, her voice was weak and low, and there was about her a general appearance of debility and suffering. She was not equal to the exertion of talking, and the visit of the nieces to the sick room was a short one, their other aunt, Cassandra, soon taking them away.

[Pg 38]

In the following month, May, Jane Austen was induced to go to Winchester, to be near a skilful doctor, who spoke encouragingly to his patient, but who from the first entertained little expectation of a permanent cure. She was accompanied by her life-long friend and sister Cassandra. They could leave their aged mother behind them with the friend and family connection who made one of the household at Chawton Cottage. Besides, Mrs. Austen was near several of her children and grandchildren. In Winchester, where the sisters had lodgings in the corner house in College Street, at the entrance to Commoners, the Austens had old and valued friends among the residents in the Close. Still Jane wrote hopefully about herself to the nephew to whom she appears to have been so much attached. There was no better way of thanking him for his affectionate concern for her during her illness than by telling him herself, as soon as possible, that she continued to get better. She seems to have been aware of the change in her penmanship, which struck him also, and hastened to observe gaily that she would not boast of her handwriting: neither that nor her face had yet recovered their proper beauty, but in other respects she gained strength very fast. She was then out of bed from nine in the morning until ten at night—upon the sofa, it was true, but she ate her meals with Aunt Cassandra in a rational way, and could employ herself and walk from one room to another. Mr. Lyford (the surgeon) said he would cure her, and if he failed, she would draw up a memorial to the Dean and Chapter, and had no doubt of redress from that pious, learned, and disinterested body. The sisters’ lodgings were very comfortable. They had a neat little drawing-room with a bow window, overlooking Dr. Gabell’s garden. Thanks to the kindness of her correspondent’s father and mother in sending her their carriage, her journey to Winchester on Saturday had been performed with very little fatigue, and had it been a fine day, she thought[Pg 39] she would have felt none; but it had distressed her much to see Uncle Henry and William Knight, who had kindly attended them on horseback, riding in the rain almost the whole way.

The cheerful letter ends solemnly: “God bless you, my dear E——. If ever you are ill, may you be as tenderly nursed as I have been. May the same blessed alleviations of anxious sympathising friends be yours; and may you possess, as I dare say you will, the greatest blessing of all, in the consciousness of not being unworthy of their love. I could not feel this. Your very affectionate aunt, J. A.”

For amidst the sweet and jubilant sights and sounds of an English May and June in the old grey cathedral town, the great English novelist was fast passing away. Jane Austen had always been a sweet-tempered, contented woman, and all that was best and noblest in her nature and her faith came out in the patience, humility, and thankfulness with which she met her last enemy. “I will only say farther,” are her loving words, in one more letter, that “my dearest sister, my tender, watchful, indefatigable nurse, has not been made ill by her exertions. As to what I owe her, and the anxious affection of all my beloved family on this occasion, I can only cry over it, and pray God to bless them more and more.”

The sister who had lived together with Jane in their home—who had been with her waking and sleeping for forty-two years—who had served the little girl as a model—who had held the office of the young author’s sole confidante beforehand, as to her characters and plots—who had rejoiced and suffered with her, stood by and soothed Jane Austen’s death-bed; so did a sister-in-law, to whom the dying woman said, almost with her last breath, “You have always been a kind sister to me, Mary.”

Two of her brothers, whom she had so cherished in her faithful affection, both clergymen living near, were frequently with her, administering the consolations[Pg 40] and services of their church, as well as testifying their constant regard. She was fully acquainted with her danger, though she continued hopeful. She had much to bind her to life. “We may well believe,” Mr. Austen Leigh writes, “that she would gladly have lived longer; but she was enabled, without dismay or complaint, to prepare for death. She was a humble, believing Christian.” And she was strengthened to rule her spirit to the last. Her sweetness of temper never failed. She was always considerate of, and grateful to, those who attended on her. At times, when she felt a little better, the ruling spirit of playfulness revived, and she amused her companions even in their sadness. She sank rapidly in the end. On being asked whether there was anything she wanted, her reply was, “Nothing but death.” These were her parting words. In quietness and peace, records Jane Austen’s nephew, she breathed her last, on the morning of July 18th, 1817, at the age of forty-two years. She was buried on the 24th of July, in Winchester Cathedral, near the centre of the north aisle, opposite the tomb of William of Wykeham. A slab of black marble marks the place.[11]

The words with which Mr. Austen Leigh concludes the memoir are full of simple pathos. “Her own family only attended the funeral. Her sister returned to her desolated home, there to devote herself to the care of her aged mother, and to live much on the memory of her lost sister, till called many years later to rejoin her. Her brothers went back sorrowing to their several homes. They were very fond and very proud of her. They were attached to her by her talents, her virtues, and her engaging manners; and each loved afterwards to fancy a resemblance in some niece or daughter of his own to the dear sister Jane, whose perfect equal they yet never expected to see.”

Surely to be thus prized and mourned by her nearest and dearest was beautiful and good—in one[Pg 41] sense best—while it need not have interfered with wider interests and influences; and, doubtless, to be so cherished was the meet reward of Jane Austen’s faithful performance of the home duties from which no literary career, however arduous and distinguished, absolved her, and of her unswerving loyalty to the domestic affections which form the inner citadel of all true natures. For charity or love must always begin at home, and reign paramount there, wherever it may end, though the extremities of the earth may own its sway.

Jane Austen’s mother survived her ten years, dying at the great age of eighty-eight. Cassandra Austen lived nearly twenty years after her mother’s death, nearly thirty years after the death of Jane, dying at the age of seventy. On the death of Cassandra Austen, Chawton Cottage was suffered to fall far down in the social scale of houses: it was divided into tenements for labourers. The rooms continued to be so used while the walls were still standing, nine or ten years ago.

FOOTNOTES:
[1]My readers may remember the old church at Kellynch, which was mentioned by Charles Musgrove as an apology to Captain Benwick for visiting the village.

[2]We are reminded of the discussion on handwriting, and the praise of Emma Woodhouse’s handwriting in “Emma.”

[3]The members of the Austen and Leigh families seem to have been much given to changing their names—sometimes acquiring estates in the process. Thus we have Mr. Leigh Perrot, Mr. Knight (who was originally Edward Austen), and at last Mr. Austen Leigh.

[4]There was a wise and really dignified moderation about people’s ideas then. Is it to our honour to have departed so far from the contented minds and simple habits of our predecessors?

[5]At the same time many popular lady novelists, including Miss Edgeworth, Lady Morgan, the Miss Porters, and Mrs. Brunton, were already in the field, and it was not immediately recognised, except perhaps, by a few great men, that a queen of novelists had appeared among them.

[6]It appears, however, to have been to her new publisher, Mr. Murray, that Jane Austen was indebted for an early sight of the books of the season, including “Paul’s Letters to his Kinsfolk.”

[7]Mr. Clarke’s tall language recalls the phrases of Mr. Collins in “Pride and Prejudice.”

[8]We have a single hint of Jane Austen’s delight in “a good play.” She alludes with eager expectation, in one of her letters, to her brother’s strenuous efforts to get tickets to hear Kean.

[9]“Persuasion” was published, together with “Northanger Abbey,” by Mr. Murray, in 1818, the year after Jane Austen’s death. The proceeds of her books which had fallen to her share in her lifetime were seven hundred pounds, but how the sum was apportioned to each novel we are not told. If contemporary favour is rarely a test of a book’s merit, still less is the sum of money which it fetches to begin with. Among the lady novelists of her day—none of whom, not even Maria Edgeworth or Susan Ferrier, deserves to be mentioned in the same breath with Jane Austen—there were several whose pecuniary gains must have been double and treble hers.

[10]The novel of the year.

[11]In addition, there is now a monument which was erected to Jane Austen’s memory by her nephew, the writer of the memoir.

[Pg 42]

decorative image

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS.

HE study of Jane Austen’s novels is in some respects a liberal education. The proper appreciation of these stories has been suggested as a gauge of intellect. But though the verdict of the best judges, including the earnest, well-nigh reverential approbation of Sir Walter Scott, and the boundless enthusiasm of Lord Macaulay, who has pronounced Jane Austen, in her more limited walk, next to Shakespeare, the test is unfair, so long as men and women’s minds, no less than the schools of fiction, are in two major, in addition to many minor divisions. Of course, where authors are concerned, in rare and great instances, as in that of Shakespeare, the divisions are united, and we have a comprehensive, many-sided genius. But these exceptions are few and far between, like stars of the first magnitude. There is a cast of inventive intellect, and a school of writing which deal exclusively with human nature in the mass, choosing to work with common materials, and to make them valuable by the penetrating fidelity, and nice perception and adaptation of the workmanship. There is another order of genius and of wit, which selects an extraordinary, sometimes an abnormal subject, whether man or woman, story or surroundings, and by the sheer power and the passionate insight which are shown in the treatment,[Pg 43] compel our comprehension and sympathy for what would otherwise be strange, perhaps repugnant to us.

These minds and schools are, and always must be, in natural antagonism to each other. The disciples of the one have rarely such breadth of faculty and taste as to be the disciples of the other. Among women, Jane Austen may be taken as the representative of the first class, Charlotte Brontë of the second. The fervent, faithful followers of the one genius are apt, more or less, to condemn and slight the other.

It is more than questionable whether the two women, had they been contemporaries, could have sympathised strongly. Of course, the opportunity was not granted to Jane Austen; but in the case of Charlotte Brontë, who stands here for what is, after all, the narrower school, though its inspiration may be deeper, she was perplexed and annoyed by the recommendation of a critic to whom she paid deference that she should read and re-read Miss Austen. Jane Austen’s work was “tame and domestic,” if not peddling, to Charlotte Brontë.

After dismissing the unfair insistence on a universal acknowledgment of the surpassing qualities, in her own line, of Jane Austen, it is still true that they are as nearly as possible perfect. Great variety of character, though in one class and amidst the same surroundings—which rendered the achievement of such variety the more remarkable—lively interest excited by the most legitimate means; the artistic cunning with which every-day events are handled; keen irony; delicate, exquisite humour, which never fails; the greatest capacity for selecting and grouping her materials—where shall we find these attractions in an equal degree to that in which they are to be met in Jane Austen’s novels? Above all, every story is as wholesome and sweet, without cloyness, as English wheat-fields repaying the cultivation of generations, and the roses, set in hardy prickles, of English gardens.

We hear much, with reason, of the great English[Pg 44] humourists. Why has a secondary place among them not been assigned to Jane Austen? Making due allowance for sex and rank, and the double restrictions which they laid upon her, none can read her novels with intelligent appreciation and fail to see that she deserves to stand high in the rank of English humourists, unless, indeed, the root-word humour is understood to mean oddity and eccentricity, and the definition humourist is confined to the writer who illustrates oddities. For it is one of Miss Austen’s crowning distinctions, that just as she hardly ever exaggerated or caricatured, so she did not care to have to do with men and women riding their hobbies.

I have been amazed to read one criticism of Jane Austen, which denies her all humour, and only grants her a sense of the ridiculous and a power of expressing it, in addition to her life-like pictures of English country life in her own rank. The critic remarks that she only provokes a smile, never a laugh. No doubt standards are different, but I am inclined to suspect that the broad burlesque and screaming farce, which to this critic appears to sum up every display of humour, and which might draw shouts of laughter from him and his school, would not win so much as a smile from the admirers of Miss Austen.

Another accusation which has been brought against Jane Austen is, that she is deficient in strength and warmth. But violence is not strength, neither is demonstrativeness warmth. Unquestionably this novelist never tears her passion to tatters. For that matter she elected not to deal with fierce passions. But in her own field of art, if restrained power and marvellous flexibility be strength, then she is strong. Indeed, the idea of weakness associated with Jane Austen is superlatively absurd. Again, self-respectful, delicate reticence may be called cold, but if so the coldness is shared by some of the best writers of fiction in every generation, and it would be well for modern English literature and its readers if such coldness were more common.

[Pg 45]

I should like to say a word on the real limitations of Jane Austen’s genius in her novels. In the first place, while the talk and writing of our mothers and grandmothers were, with regard to many things, simpler and more plain-spoken than ours, there is another side on which they were strictly reserved. Deep feeling, religious opinions, personal testimony on the highest questions, were, unless in exceptional circles, withheld and kept hidden as too sacred for general discussion; above all, as unfit for the pages of a story. No one who knows much of the women and their books can doubt the vital religious principles of Jane Austen and Jane and Anna Maria Porter. But though Jane Porter always included fervent religious faith among the attributes of her idealised fantastic heroes of romance, Anna Maria, in the only tale in which she showed how well and pleasantly she could deal with contemporary life, apologised anxiously in the preface for the serious tone of the later volumes. Jane Austen, a stronger-minded woman, could entertain a still more decided view of her calling, and could restrain any impulse to overstep it. She is almost absolutely silent on every motive and principle out of what she held to be her province; nay, she frequently brings forward the lower motives of sound common sense and rational prudence, just as a sensitive person would prefer to urge them still, in mixed company, rather than bring in loftier obligations, when to do so might be casting pearls before swine. We have to study the conduct rather than the speeches of her characters, just as we have to look at the lives of some of the best men and women in every generation, to discern to our satisfaction that they are, with all their human frailties, thoroughly reverent and noble-minded.

There is nothing in the last observation to imply that the author shirked any duty of speech which she recognised. On the contrary, in carrying out her purpose of exhibiting the deplorable results of an entirely worldly education in the Crawfords and Bertrams in[Pg 46] “Mansfield Park;” in indicating the little straws of former bad habits which are enough to expose a hypocrite to eyes willing to be enlightened in Mr. Elliot in “Persuasion,” she probably put force upon her natural reserve, that she might not fail in her fidelity to her moral. For one of the most gifted English novelists never wrote without a good moral, more or less conspicuous. So universally was the true morality of Jane Austen’s novels acknowledged, that at a time when novels were, with too much cause, largely tabooed in many households, there was a general exception made in favour of the tales in which the characters said little or nothing about religion, but lived it to some extent.

The absence of the most distant allusion to a higher life and its power is most conspicuous in the clergymen who figure largely in Miss Austen’s novels. Her biographer and nephew, Mr. Austen Leigh, himself a clergyman, and the son and grandson of clergymen, sees himself called upon to refer to this, when he says in her memoir that the standard of duty in the Church is much higher than formerly, and that the profession and practice even of Henry Tilney and Edmund Bertram would be different to-day.

It is to this marked restraint which Jane Austen put upon the expression of all sacred depths of feeling, whether they belonged to religion or not, quite as much as to her mental constitution, or to the formal conditions of her generation, that another result is due. While we have so much that may instruct, entertain, and delight us in her stories, we have nothing that will harrow, and not much that will move us to thoughts which lie too deep for tears. There is no end of enchanting humour; there is curiously little pathos.

With regard to that other criticism which may be made of defective taste and sentiment in some of the work which is otherwise so excellent, as in “Pride and Prejudice,” in the free discussion not only by a vulgar matchmaker like Mrs. Bennet, and by her silly, giddy[Pg 47] younger daughters, but by modest and charming girls like Jane and Elizabeth Bennet, of the probability of Mr. Bingley’s falling in love with one of the girls among whom he has come, and marrying her—thus at the same time securing her happiness and providing her with an unexceptionable establishment—I believe it is an example at once of blunter candour than exists at present, and of the sole light in which a girl’s position was then regarded. It goes without saying that Jane and Elizabeth were incapable either of instituting unbecoming and unwomanly attempts to attract the hero of the hour, or of consenting to marry any other hero, whom they could neither respect nor love, simply as the means to secure an establishment in life. As it happened, Cassandra and Jane Austen, in whom some of their contemporaries saw the originals of Jane and Elizabeth Bennet, proved equally incapable of the last piece of unworthy time-serving. But Miss Austen was what all true artists and teachers must be,—in advance of the prevailing morality of her day. She argued and acted on the side of what was upright and unworldly; still she was so far affected by the tone of thought around her as to cause her best women in “Pride and Prejudice” to wait and watch for Bingley’s throwing the handkerchief, while they coolly debate Jane Bennet’s chances of attracting and fixing his regard. A hundred or eighty years ago there was but one career for a woman not possessed of an independent fortune—that of marriage. Jane Austen never concealed—on the contrary, she publicly proclaimed in “Emma,” that she looked upon the necessity of a gentlewoman’s working for her livelihood as a very hard and well-nigh degrading obligation, an ordeal which would expose her to much that was at once painful and injurious. We may hope that we have to some extent happily changed all that. Besides the prejudices, no doubt not ill-founded, on all the evidence which was then in the possession of even the wisest and most liberal-minded of our predecessors, we must not forget that Miss Austen has placed her five[Pg 48] Miss Bennets in a specially trying and precarious position. Their father’s estate was entailed on male heirs, and on his death passed to a cousin, who was a stranger to the family. The interest of the mother’s small fortune of four thousand pounds was inadequate to maintain her daughters, save in a poor way, altogether beneath what they had been accustomed to. The circumstances were not enough to tempt the fine-spirited, true-hearted elder girls into any betrayal of their real dignity and independence in the matter of marriage. But Jane Austen did not mean—it would be ridiculous in taking the generation and its rooted restrictions into consideration, to suppose she could—that the precariousness of the Bennets’ prospects did not influence them, and their friends for them, in desiring that they should be speedily and well married.

There is an undeniable occasional hardness and sharpness of satire, most perceptible in the earlier of the novels, and softening as the author’s nature mellowed. As an instance of change in a familiar custom, there is hardly ever an abbreviation of a christian name in the family life of Miss Austen’s novels, any more than in the family life of her class in that day. With the exception of Lizzy Bennet in “Pride and Prejudice,” and Fanny Price in “Mansfield Park,” the abbreviations end with the period of childhood. No perpetual Charlies and Neds, Kates or Kittys, and Babs, meet us at every step. There may be less formality in the modern practice, but there is also a suspicion of less manliness and womanliness, with their earnestness and responsibility. What serious sense of duty can be expected from a Hal, or a Loo, not to say from a Dolly representing an Adolphus, or a Dot standing as a pet name for a stately Margaret or a grandly simple Mary?

Jane Austen had a high opinion of the merit of her work. When her characters were compared to living people, she maintained stoutly that she was too proud of her gentlemen to admit that they were only Mr. A. or Colonel B., although she qualified the assertion by allowing—for[Pg 49] the credit of human nature, and for her own credit—to avoid the accusation of painting angels instead of men, that with regard to her favourites, Edmund Bertram and Mr. Knightley, they were very far from being what she knew English gentlemen often were.

In the long list—growing always longer with the years—of the distinguished admirers of Miss Austen’s books, Mr. Austen Leigh quotes formidable names—formidable to those who hold an opposite view of her claims as an author. Among widely different names of men are those of Southey, Coleridge, Sir James Mackintosh, Guizot, Lord Holland, Whewell, Sydney Smith, Archbishop Whately, Sir Walter Scott,[12] the American statesman Quincey, and Lord Macaulay. Only one woman’s name is given—that of Miss Mitford. We must hope, for the honour of intellectual and literary women, that many more names might have been added of women who have gladly and gratefully acknowledged Jane Austen as a queen of novelists. To the examples cited, large additions might be made from the names of modern thinkers and students of human nature, since among them the novelist’s fame is still increasing.

Let it never be said, for women’s own sakes, that it is among women—among bright, quick-witted girls such as she herself was when she wrote “Pride and Prejudice” and “Northanger Abbey,” far outstripping mature competitors—that Jane Austen begins to be no longer read and reverenced.

In her own day, Jane Austen kept a collection of such criticisms of her books as she could come across, including in the collection various contemptuous opinions as that “one lady could say nothing better of ‘Mansfield Park’ than that it was a ‘mere novel.’”

Another owned that “she thought ‘Sense and Sensibility’[Pg 50] and ‘Pride and Prejudice’ downright nonsense, but expected to like ‘Mansfield Park’ better, and, having finished the first volume, hoped that she had got through the worst.”

Another “did not like ‘Mansfield Park.’ Nothing interesting in the characters, language poor.”

“One gentleman read the first and last chapters of ‘Emma,’ but did not look at the rest, because he had been told that it was not interesting.”

“The opinions of another gentleman about ‘Emma’ were so bad that they could not be repeated to the author.”

Among the most remarkable of the criticisms worthy of the name of Jane Austen, are those of Sir Walter Scott and Macaulay. The generous entry in Sir Walter’s diary is as follows:—“Read again, for the third time at least, ‘Pride and Prejudice.’ That young lady had a talent for describing the involvements of feelings and characters of ordinary life, which is to me the most wonderful I ever met with. The big bow-wow strain I can do myself, like any now going; but the exquisite touch which renders ordinary commonplace things and characters interesting from the truth of the description and the sentiment, is denied to me. What a pity such a gifted creature died so early!”

Macaulay has this entry in his journal:—“I have now read once again all Miss Austen’s novels—charming they are. There are in the world no compositions which approach nearer to perfection.”

In Macaulay’s well-known essay on Madame d’Arblay, there is, in the course of an admirable comparison between the two writers, the following high praise of Jane Austen:—

“Highest among those who have exhibited human nature by means of dialogue, stands Shakespeare. His variety is, like the variety of nature, endless diversity, scarcely any monstrosity. The characters of which he has given us an impression, as vivid as that which we receive from the characters of our own associates, are to[Pg 51] be reckoned by scores. Yet in all these scores hardly one character is to be found which deviates widely from the common standard, and which we could call very eccentric if we met it in real life. The silly rule that every man has one ruling passion, and that this clue, once known, unravels all the mysteries of his conduct, finds no countenance in the plays of Shakespeare. There man appears as he is, made up of a crowd of passions, which contend for the mastery over him, and govern him in turn. What is Hamlet’s ruling passion? Or Othello’s? Or Harry the Fifth’s? Or Wolsey’s? Or Lear’s? Or Shylock’s? Or Benedick’s? Or Macbeth’s? Or that of Cassius? Or that of Falconbridge? But we might go on for ever. Take a single example—Shylock. Is he so eager for money as to be indifferent to revenge? Or so eager for revenge as to be indifferent to money? Or so bent on both together as to be indifferent to the honour of his nation and the law of Moses? All his propensities are mingled with each other, so that, in trying to apportion to each its proper part, we find the same difficulty which constantly meets us in real life. A superficial critic may say that hatred is Shylock’s ruling passion. But how many passions have amalgamated to form that hatred? It is partly the result of wounded pride: Antonio has called him dog. It is partly the result of covetousness: Antonio has hindered him of half a million; and when Antonio is gone, there will be no limit to the gains of usury. It is partly the result of national and religious feeling: Antonio has spat on the Jewish gabardine; and the oath of revenge has been sworn by the Jewish Sabbath. We might go through all the characters which we have mentioned, and through fifty more in the same way, for it is the constant manner of Shakespeare to represent the human mind as lying not under the absolute dominion of one despotic propensity, but under a mixed government, in which a hundred powers balance each other. Admirable as he was in all parts of his art, we most admire him for this, that, while he has left us a greater number of striking portraits than all other[Pg 52] dramatists put together, he has scarcely left us a single caricature.

“Shakespeare has neither equal nor second; but among the writers who, in the point which we have noticed, have approached nearest to the manner of the great master, we have no hesitation in placing Jane Austen, a woman of whom England is justly proud. She has given us a multitude of characters, all in a certain sense commonplace, all such as we meet every day; yet they are all as perfectly discriminated from each other as if they were the most eccentric of human beings. There are, for example, four clergymen, none of whom we should be surprised to find in any parsonage in the kingdom—Mr. Edward Ferrars, Mr. Henry Tilney, Mr. Edmund Bertram, and Mr. Elton. They are all specimens of the upper part of the middle class; they have all been liberally educated; they all lie under the restraints of the same sacred profession; they are all young; they are all in love; not one of them has any hobby-horse, to use the phrase of Sterne; not one has a ruling passion, such as we read of in Pope. Who would not have expected them to be insipid likenesses of each other? No such thing. Harpagon is not more unlike to Jourdain, Joseph Surface is not more unlike to Sir Lucius O’Trigger, than every one of Miss Austen’s young divines to all of his reverend brethren. And almost all this is done by touches so delicate, that they elude analysis, that they defy the powers of description, and that we know them to exist only by the general effect to which they have contributed.”

Macaulay’s sister, Lady Trevelyan, told Mr. Austen Leigh that her brother had intended to write a memoir of Jane Austen, with criticisms on her works, to prefix it to a new edition of her novels, and from the proceeds of the sale to erect a monument to her memory in Winchester Cathedral. It is said that the references to the novels in Lord Macaulay’s “Journal” served to carry out his purpose so far, attracting a public which—to[Pg 53] its shame, shall I say?—knew not the author, and selling off a whole edition of Jane Austen’s tales. That the erection of the monument in Winchester Cathedral followed is of less consequence. She needs no monument save what her brain and hands wrought out. Let her own works follow her.

decorative image

FOOTNOTES:
[12]Jane Austen’s nephew, on visiting Abbotsford, was suffered to take into his hand one of the volumes of Sir Walter’s well-worn set of her novels.

[Pg 54]

decorative image

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS, AND JANE AUSTEN.
“PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.”[13]
I.

T is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.” Such is the lively sentence with which “Pride and Prejudice” begins. Then the author proceeds to illustrate the statement in her own admirable way.

Mr. Bingley, a young bachelor, well-born, wealthy, good-looking, agreeable, kindly-disposed—even sensible, while not too clever for his company, suddenly sets the whole country gentry of a quiet neighbourhood into a pleasant ferment, by taking a lease of Netherfield Park, and coming to occupy the house. My readers must remember that it is nearly a century ago since this happened, for it actually happened. The charm of Jane Austen’s situations is that they must have happened thousands of times. Her people all lived, are living still, since human nature never dies. We may correctly think and talk of Jane and Elizabeth Bennet, and their father and mother; of Bingley and his sisters; of Darcy and his sister; as if they were real men and women. They were and are the very men and women whom our grandfathers knew, whom we[Pg 55] know and visit, like and dislike, marry and refuse to marry.

A few customs have changed: greater breathing-space has come into every-day intercourse with better education, increased facilities of helping ourselves, moving about and knowing our neighbours—not only in the next parsonage and country house, or at most in a popular watering-place, but in the busy, endless streets of London, or up in the romantic glens of the Scotch highlands, or still farther away, in nooks of the Apennines, or recesses of the Black Forest. Such revolutions on revolutions have occurred in dress, that we have come back from the antipodes of one fashion to the same fashion again, looking new and fresh once more on the lithe figures and about the blooming faces of our nineteenth-century girls. Still we do not see a young lady, her hair in turret curls, wearing a low-necked gown long before even her early dinner-hour, and holding above her head, as a much-needed protection, one of the first specimens of the original large, green, tent-shaped parasols such as I remember in a representation of Elizabeth Bennet, when she accompanied Lady Catherine de Bourgh to their memorable interview in the wilderness on one side of the lawn at Longbourn. Wildernesses, in their turn, have disappeared; certain phrases have grown obsolete; but the men and women who led that kind of life, dressed in a style which, when we do not chance to be familiar with it, we insist on regarding as outré, and spoke in a manner half racy, half precise, are among us still, and will always be among us, with merely slight superficial differences.

But I wish to recall, at this moment, the distant date of “Pride and Prejudice,” in order to say that the arrival of a young man like Charles Bingley, or “Bingley,” as he is called in the old use of surnames in conversation, was a much greater event to a country circle then, than it could be now.

It would still be a good deal—witness the use of[Pg 56] the same situation in the clever modern novel, “Mr. Smith.” But the class of women who are powerfully affected by Mr. Smith’s appearance on the scene, and who make him the centre of all their hopes and plans, are altogether inferior, socially and intellectually, to the women with whom Jane Austen dealt.

About a hundred years ago “to paint tables, cover screens, and net purses,” formed the general standard of girls’ accomplishments—a standard which did not furnish many topics of conversation. It is the girls’ own fault if they have not wider interests to-day. Therefore, those among them who are in a fever of curiosity when a new comer crosses their path, are decidedly lower in the scale, in every respect, than the gossips were in the time of Jane Austen.

We are first introduced to the Bennets of Longbourn in their animated discussion of the welcome event in their quiet lives. Soon we know the family intimately. We find vulgar, shallow Mrs. Bennet assailing her husband with unvarnished arguments that he ought to be one of the first to call on their new neighbour “for the sake of his daughters.”

We listen with much amusement to eccentric, witty, Mr. Bennet, who has married his wife for her beauty, and seeks compensation for her silliness in laughing at it on all occasions, in those mocking, terse little speeches, in which he responds to her profuse “my dears” with an answering flow of “my dears,” while he takes her off, to her broad, over-blown face, unsuspected by her, at every word.

The two elder daughters are the cream of the family. Jane is lovely and loveable. Her good understanding is so well balanced by her gentle, tolerant temper that she is able to bear patiently and tenderly with her mother’s foibles, including her vain-glory in Jane’s beauty. Jane is so fair, sweet, and reasonable in the most unassuming fashion, that she cannot help winning—without any effort at popularity—good opinions on all sides, even from the most unlikely quarters.

[Pg 57]

Elizabeth, with her fine eyes, brown skin, light, graceful figure, nimble feet in dancing, nimble tongue in talking, is a warm-hearted, softened, womanly edition of the father whose favourite she is. In answer to the covert reproach once addressed to her, that the wisest and best of men—nay, the wisest and best of their actions—may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke, she defends herself frankly yet earnestly, and we feel it is Jane Austen speaking for herself by the lips of Elizabeth Bennet. “Certainly there are such people, but I hope I am not one of them. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can.” Withal, this laughter-loving girl, in spite of her naturally hasty conclusions and rash judgments, struggles so faithfully to be fair, is so candid in confessing her mistakes and submitting to pay the penalty when they are brought home to her—she is at once so frank and fearless, yet so dutiful and reverent in the middle of her innocent daring, so unselfish and devoted in her sisterly attachment, so true a woman, so thorough a lady, that while we willingly respect and like the more faultless Jane, we do more, we love the more tempted and tried Elizabeth.

It is good for young readers of the present day to look at Elizabeth Bennet, and learn to discriminate between the sparkling intelligence and gay, sweet temper of the good, kind, young girl in her lawful attractiveness, and the miserable travesty of her in many modern heroines, in whom profanity and levity do duty for wit, audacious ignorance for originality, and coarse licence for nobility of nature.

The bond of sisterhood, more than any other relation, seems to have influenced Jane Austen in her art. With her own closest life-long friend in her sister Cassandra, the author who so rarely repeats herself in the circumscribed sphere in which she chose to work, again and again draws a pair of sisters, for the most part sharing[Pg 58] every joy and sorrow.[14] In two or three cases—those of the Bennets, the Dashwoods, Mrs. John Knightley and Emma Woodhouse, we have the contrast between the milder and more serene elder, and the livelier, more impulsive younger sister, which caused their contemporaries to say that Jane and Elizabeth Bennet stood for Cassandra and Jane Austen. But the author’s nephew pronounced against this conjecture. It is said, indeed, that in gentleness of disposition and tenderness of heart Jane Austen bore more resemblance to Jane than to Elizabeth Bennet.

Mary Bennet, the third daughter in the household at Longbourn, and the plainest member of a handsome family, tries to supplement her deficient personal attractions by such mental acquirements and accomplishments as are within her reach. These are laboriously learnt for the purpose of display. In contrast to her sister Elizabeth, she has no natural shrewdness. She is a pedantic, sententious young goose, with her elaborate exhibition of worthless knowledge and formal speeches out of commonplace books. Mary Bennet contrives to render herself as ridiculous as her younger sisters, Kitty and Lydia, who are precocious, noisy girls of seventeen and fifteen. They are too unformed and callow to be treated separately at first, but we have one significant distinction between them. Lydia, big and bouncing for her age, already arrogating rights from being the tallest of the family, spoilt by her mother, invariably takes the lead. Kitty simply runs after her more headstrong junior. The most individual trait Kitty shows is the peevish impatience of contradiction which belongs to a weak character.

We may remark, by the way, that Jane Austen, while she cuttingly condemns pedantry and conceit,[Pg 59] never dreams of offering a premium to sheer juvenility, empty-headedness, and frivolity, after the example of some of the strange preferences which are presented for the consideration and edification of nineteenth-century readers.

Miss Lydia and Miss Kitty Bennet spend the chief part of each day in walking to Meryton, a market town, where a militia regiment is stationed, which, unhappily for the growth in wisdom of the young ladies, is situated only a mile from the village of Longbourn, and Longbourn House, their home.

In Meryton dwells Mrs. Philips, Mrs. Bennett’s sister, the wife of a country attorney in a lower social grade than the Bennets. Good-natured, commonplace Mrs. Philips is gratified by her nieces’ company, and willing to indulge them with any amount of dawdling and gossiping in her house. When no better goal presents itself, the shop windows, with the latest bonnets and muslins, are always to be had. Above all, there is the chance of encountering some of the militia officers in their regimentals—those dazzling red coats, which filled the imaginations of girls like Lydia and Kitty Bennet, and which were not without their picturesque merits even in the more reflective eyes of the elder sisters. Well for girls that they have no regimentals, worn off parade, to turn their heads to-day. If they are still caught by the pomp and circumstance of glorious war, and enthralled by its blatant trumpeting, at least, the “red rags,” which are now for the most part kept sedulously out of sight, are no longer to blame.

Mr. Bennet calls on Mr. Bingley, as he has always meant to do, in spite of all his protests to the contrary, but the sisters first meet the hero at a Meryton assembly.

That was the era of assemblies—subscription balls, in rooms provided for card-playing and supping as well as dancing, under highly respectable auspices, given at regular intervals in all the country towns, and duly patronised by gentle and simple, clergy and laity.

If people stayed all the year round and year after[Pg 60] year in their own quiet country neighbourhood, some recreation must be provided for them. The assemblies were at once simple and social. The stereotyped recreations of the last century were dancing and card-playing. If both were liable to grave abuse, we may still hope that many worthy people used them temperately and not unconscientiously.

A rousing report had gone beforehand through the ball-goers that the already popular Mr. Bingley was to crown his popularity by attending the assembly, and bringing with him twelve ladies and six gentlemen. The reality falls short of the rumour, but there is consolation to the belles of the place in the dwindling down of the dozen strange ladies into Mr. Bingley’s two sisters, one married and one unmarried, even though the six gentlemen also fade away into a couple, one of whom is Mr. Hurst, the husband of Mr. Bingley’s married sister. But for half the time the ball lasts the other gentleman makes up for every defalcation, and is a power in himself. He is not only a tall, handsome, distinguished-looking young man, he is also discovered to be allied to the peerage, and to possess a large estate in Derbyshire, with an unencumbered rent-roll of ten thousand a-year—and here gossips’ tongues do not wag too wildly.

But the exultation over such a guest is soon damped by his cold, reserved manners. The stranger dances once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, speaks only to the members of his own party, and declines any introductions. And Meryton is spirited enough to resent the inference. If Mr. Darcy considers himself above his company, the company decline any further homage to his air and figure—even to his estate in Derbyshire.

In fact, Mr. Darcy is clever, proud, fastidious—conceiving himself entitled by his many undeniable advantages, which, however, he does not wear generously and genially, to his pride and fastidiousness.

A man in a similar position may very well be[Pg 61] tempted to corresponding faults still, but even with a later code of manners disfigured by laziness, self-indulgence, and superciliousness, such arrogant haughtiness as Darcy betrayed, could hardly now be entertained by a man of Darcy’s sense and worth, and even if entertained, would no longer be openly exhibited in modern society. Local magnates were formerly permitted the tone of small sovereigns, and even when they were from home they were not required to come down from the heights of their overweening dignity and exclusiveness.

It is at so early a stage of their acquaintance as this important Meryton assembly that Bingley, accessible and agreeable to everybody, and dancing every dance, as a young man ought, shows his admiration of the sweet young beauty of the room—Jane Bennet, of Longbourn—by distinguishing her among his partners. He dances twice—one may say four times, with her—for we must remember that the old social, quaintly-performed, quaintly-named country dances were generally arranged in double sets. The couple who danced down the first were landed, so to speak, at the bottom of the second, up which they had to work their way, and then dance down a second time. A very respectable portion of time was thus employed. There were natural and graceful opportunities afforded for making friends, and for engaging, while still in a crowd, unexposed to invidious notice and comment, in cheerful or sentimental, more or less brilliant conversation à deux, but not so much à deux that the speakers could not fall apart and talk by way of variety to the ladies and gentlemen, whom the couple were pretty sure to know, standing above and below them in the set. Jane Austen repeatedly uses these country dances as a means to the speedy acquaintance of her young people. We have it on record that she herself had a hearty enjoyment in dancing, and was, like Anna Maria Porter and Susannah Blamire, a proficient in what was then held a peculiarly elegant accomplishment for a young lady. She was not, therefore, likely to undervalue the merely graceful exercise[Pg 62] of dancing. Still, dancing must have been to her, as no doubt it was to her heroes and heroines, a fitting excuse for conversation—sensible as well as sprightly, serious enough sometimes, without any consciousness of incongruity in being in earnest in the middle of a country dance.

I may be told that there is an ample and better provision for a tête à tête in the conspicuous or the secluded saunter between the rapid whirls of round dances, but to my mind the earlier mode was the more daintily decorous, the freer from compromise, not to say the more social. One is tempted to wish back again the old English country dances, in which fathers and mothers, sons and daughters, often stood up in the same dance, and went with merry method through the intricate mazes with the suggestive names, “The White Cockade,” dating from the Jacobite rebellion, “The Wind that Shook the Barley,” of Irish origin, “The Country Bumpkin,” an English measure, “Petronella” and the “Boulanger,” like the Cotillon, of French descent. Will they not return, with the Queen Anne furniture and the Gainsborough costumes, and take their places along with the time-honoured “Sir Roger de Coverley?”

Mr. Bingley’s promising preference for Jane Bennet in these significant four dances is artlessly enough hailed by all her friends and neighbours, and ingenuously owned by herself to her dear sister and confidante, Lizzy.

It is at this ball, too, that Darcy makes that slighting speech within earshot of Elizabeth, which starts their acquaintance on an entirely wrong footing.

Elizabeth Bennet, with her own unapproachable gifts of eyes, and tongue, and toes, is a belle only second to her sister, and it is an unwonted experience for her to be sitting down during a couple of dances for lack of a partner. As if that were not enough, she has the mortification of hearing the repulse given to the well-disposed but rash assault which Bingley at that moment makes on his impracticable friend standing near her.

“Come, Darcy,” cries the amiable, indefatigable[Pg 63] dancer, “I must have you dance. I hate to have you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better dance.”

“I certainly shall not,” declines Darcy. “You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner.” He adds that Bingley’s sisters are engaged, and that there is not another woman in the room with whom it would not be a punishment to him to stand up.

Bingley cries out at his friend’s fastidiousness, and maintains he has never met so many pleasant girls in his life as on that evening, and there are several of them uncommonly pretty.

“You are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” says Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.

“Oh! she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld,” vows Bingley, with effusion. “But there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you who is very pretty, and I daresay very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”

“Which do you mean?” asks Darcy, and, turning round, he looks for a moment at Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdraws his own, and coldly says, “She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt me, and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other young men. You had better return to your partner, and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.”

Was ever heroine so put down in her own hearing? Elizabeth, we are told, remains with no very cordial feelings towards the offender, but, being the bright young girl she is, she makes stock of the incident by telling the story with great spirit among her friends; and for the superb Mr. Darcy there is a proper punishment preparing.

Mr. Bingley’s sisters are drawn with a few fine touches. They are fashionable, stylish-looking women, each possessing a fortune of twenty thousand pounds. They have a great opinion of their own claims, and a[Pg 64] corresponding disdain of what they reckon the greatly inferior claims of others. With all their polish and savoir faire, which enable them to be entertaining when they like, they are always arrogant and ill-bred, and can be insolent when provoked.

Yet even Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley are attracted by beautiful, gentle Jane Bennet, and drawn into the semblance of a friendship for her. They are too independent and too far removed, as they conceive, from such rivalry, to experience any jealousy, or to take alarm on their brother’s account, till matters have gone a considerable length between Bingley and Jane.

Among other minor characters in the book are the Lucas family, who occupy the next county house, and are the nearest neighbours of the Bennets, and on intimate terms with them. Charlotte Lucas, the eldest daughter, a plain-looking, but sensible and agreeable young woman of seven and twenty, is Elizabeth Bennet’s great friend after her sister Jane. Charlotte’s father, Sir William, has been in trade, from which he has retired on the accident of receiving the honour of knighthood. He was always civil and obliging, and from the great era in his life he became elaborately courteous, with bourgeois fine manners. He is profuse in good-natured—sometimes mal-à-propos—compliments. Thus, at a large party at Lucas Lodge, the host blandly praises Darcy—for his dancing of all things, and then, struck with the notion of doing a gallant thing, arrests Elizabeth Bennet, who is passing them: “My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is at hand.”

Have we not all known, at some period in our lives, the well-intentioned, obtuse, complacent, slightly Brummagem Sir William, who can be terrible, without the slightest suspicion of it, on occasions?

Elizabeth draws back, and refuses the partner very decidedly, and her resistance does her no harm with the[Pg 65] gentleman, though he has really not been unwilling to lend himself to Sir William’s clumsy move.

In truth, the stately, grave Mr. Darcy, after refusing to see anything worth the trouble of bestowing his notice in Elizabeth Bennet—after taking the greatest pains to convince all his party that she has not got a good feature in her face—becomes keenly alive to the charm of that face, and captivated by the animation and archness which neither fear his censure nor solicit his favour. For Elizabeth simply regards him as the man who makes himself disagreeable everywhere, and who has spoken slightingly of herself. She is happily careless of his pretensions. What are his birth, estate, intellect, and person to her? With her it is “handsome is that handsome does.”

And Darcy, with all his faults, has enough sterling manliness and merit to be not piqued, but strangely attracted by her easy indifference to his worldly advantages, combined as it is with the girl’s quick intelligence and happy, winning playfulness.

We appreciate, too, the independent spirit which causes Darcy to make no secret of his change of opinion; not that it is a matter of much consequence to his mind, for a Darcy of Pemberley can never lower himself in his own eyes, or those of his world, by marrying the daughter of a poor, second-rate country gentleman, whose wife has been taken from an inferior professional circle. What is a great deal worse, the whole family of the Bennets, with the exception of Jane and Elizabeth, are more or less objectionable—Mr. Bennet in indulging his caustic humour in total disregard of the figures his wife and daughters cut in society; Mrs. Bennet, in continually exposing her vulgarity and folly; Mary Bennet, in rendering herself a laughing-stock by her assumption of learning and wisdom, with small claims to the same. As for Lydia and Kitty Bennet, while there are militia officers in Meryton the girls will flirt with them; and while Meryton remains at a mile’s distance from Longbourn, the younger Miss Bennets will go there every day.

[Pg 66]

But Darcy, in the face of the pronounced dislike to the second Miss Bennet entertained by his friend’s sisters—one of whom is laying close siege to Darcy’s hand and heart—calmly revokes his judgment, announces his admiration of Elizabeth’s eyes, and defends her vivacity from the charge of pertness. It is in vain Miss Bingley, with her eyes sharpened by jealousy, takes the woman’s method to drive him from his position by chaffing exaggeration of his sentiments, and malicious predictions of his future experiences with his mother-in-law; asking him if he will have his Elizabeth’s uncle, the attorney’s, portrait, opposite that of his uncle, the judge’s, and whether it may not be advisable for him to restrain that something in the coming Mrs. Darcy’s manners which borders on impertinence. Darcy stands to his colours, so far as admiring Elizabeth Bennet, and owning to the admiration, are concerned.

Elizabeth is so thoroughly without suspicion of her modified conquest, that when she finds Mr. Darcy looking at her, listening to her, and taking up his station in the quarter of a room where he can see and hear her better, she is so puzzled for his reasons, that she is compelled to conclude there is something about her peculiarly repugnant to his taste and sense of propriety; and being of the temper which she supposes, she fancies he takes a certain satisfaction in reckoning up her deficiencies. When he asks her to dance, she is so surprised that she accepts the unwelcome honour before she knows what she is doing; and then, provoked with her mechanical compliance, she seeks revenge in trying to behave in the manner most disagreeable to him. She will go down the double set in unbroken silence, so far as the conversation rests with her; and she is aware young Darcy is a quiet, grave man, while she is well known as a ready, gay talker. All at once it strikes her that a solemn mute performance of their duty as dancers may be exactly what he wishes; and then she challenges him, in an archly-defiant speech, to make conversation for her. After all[Pg 67] he is nothing loth, though she does provoke and offend him by the determined conviction she constantly shows that they are two persons of entirely different characters and inclinations, and by her wilful, half-jesting misunderstanding of his feelings and opinions.

On one occasion he is led into the admission that he has an unyielding temper. His good opinion once lost is lost for ever.

“That is a failing indeed,” cried Elizabeth. “Implacable resentment is a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well; I really cannot laugh at it. You are safe from me.”

The girl’s mingled light-hearted banter and vehement antagonism form, after all, part of her fascination; and we are told that against any affront they inflict she has a powerful pleader in the feeling she has already excited in Darcy’s breast.

The progress of Bingley’s lover-like attentions to Jane, and Darcy’s brisk skirmishing with Elizabeth, is considerably accelerated by a visit of almost a week’s duration paid perforce by the girls to Netherfield.

Jane had been invited to dine with the two ladies of the house, to relieve their dulness in the absence of the gentlemen, who were dining with the officers in Meryton. She had been detained by rain in the first place, and by a violent cold in the second.

Elizabeth hearing of her sister’s illness, and being unable to procure the carriage, set out and walked the three miles between Longbourn and Netherfield. She was fearless of fatigue, or the accusation of unfeminine, unladylike independence of escort. She was equal to muddy roads, intervening stiles, and the cool reception she was likely to receive from Miss Bingley, so that Elizabeth could but relieve her anxiety concerning Jane, reach her, and be a comfort in nursing her through her little illness.

Elizabeth arrives with draggled skirts and rosy cheeks. She cheerfully surmounts Miss Bingley’s and Mrs. Hurst’s contemptuous amazement at what they[Pg 68] regard as Miss Eliza Bennet’s uncalled-for Amazonian feat. At last they are under the necessity, in common civility, of requesting Elizabeth to remain with her sister; and the patient, suffering Jane is ill enough for the moment to make Elizabeth thankful that she has come, and to justify her in the step she has taken.

Besides, Elizabeth is gratified by the master of the house’s cordial reception, and by his unfeigned anxiety on behalf of his invalid guest. As to the fact that Darcy is successful in silencing the strictures of the ladies of the house on the “fright” Miss Eliza Bennet has chosen to appear before them, by dwelling on the additional brilliancy the early walk has lent to her complexion, and by maintaining that certainly the expedition proves her to be a most affectionate sister, Elizabeth remains profoundly ignorant of his championship.

Two new figures appear on the stage. The first is Mr. Collins, the vicar of Hunsford, in Kent, and the cousin, hitherto a stranger to the Bennet family, who, by the terms of the entail, succeeds to the Longbourn estate after Mr. Bennet’s death. He proposes a friendly visit, in a letter which is the reflex of the writer, who is a stupid, narrow-minded young man, while yet perfectly respectable and not ill-intentioned. His pompous self-importance, in which there is some family likeness to the leading mental traits in his cousin Mary Bennet, is blended with an equally natural subserviency and obsequiousness, with such a breadth of skill and comicality, that he is one of the great artist’s triumphs.

Jane Austen was a good woman and a good church-woman. She was a clergyman’s daughter, and two of her brothers were clergymen. The parsonage as well as the hall had a special place in her novels. In “Mansfield Park” she insisted on the honourable office of a clergyman. She was the last person wantonly to bring disrespect on her father’s cloth, but she was also the most sincere of women and of artists. She was acquainted with the Collins type of clergymen, which had replaced the still more accommodating, even vicious, family[Pg 69] chaplain, under the lower and coarser moral standard of previous generations. Her Mr. Collins is not unprincipled or unconscientious, but his patroness engrosses his small, mean mind, and usurps the rights of his other parishioners; until, to give satisfaction at the great house—to come in there as an acknowledged, privileged dependent—to carve a joint—to help to make up the card-table—to amuse the old and the young—to pass away a dull hour—to take upon himself any troublesome task he can appropriate, are looked upon by him as at once among his chief duties and greatest advantages.

With unshrinking, incisive hand, Jane Austen did good service to all the churches by aiding in ridding them of despicable toadies.

Mr. Collins is all in a piece, while he is of complex fabric, with his haunting self-consciousness, his perpetual references to his “humble abode,” and his “revered patroness, Lady Catherine,” with her splendid establishment at Rosings, to which he is so affably summoned several times a week. His densely thick-headed, sycophantish homage is extended to Lady Catherine’s kindred in the person of her nephew, the resisting, disgusted Mr. Darcy. Mr. Collins’s self-complacent, over-done, heavy civility is bestowed freely on everybody, and he promises liberally beforehand formal letters of thanks to his hosts for their esteemed hospitality.

Such a man, however diverting to her strong sense of the ludicrous, cannot but be odious in other respects to Elizabeth Bennet, yet it is at Elizabeth’s feet that he lays his dull, conceited, exasperatingly considerate proposals.

Lady Catherine is of opinion Mr. Collins, as a clergyman, should marry soon. His solid merits and unexceptionable position in life warrant him in seeking a wife. He is led to Longbourn with the laudable intention of making some reparation to his fair cousins for the circumstance that, on the death of their respected father, Mr. Collins must inherit the property; and in Elizabeth he flatters himself he has found the excellent, charming,[Pg 70] economical young woman who will at once secure to him the felicity he is entitled to expect, and satisfy the just expectations of Lady Catherine.

To the extreme mortification of her mother, but with the entire approval of her father, Elizabeth declines the obliging proposal. The scene is unique and unapproachable, in which the sublimely confident, quite unembarrassed Mr. Collins does not so much plead his cause solemnly as unfold his credentials, while Elizabeth refuses him in stronger and stronger language, for the suitor will not accept his congé, and persists in attributing it to the becoming coyness of “an elegant female.”

At last Elizabeth escapes, referring Mr. Collins to her father, protesting in despair that whatever his answer may be, at least Mr. Collins cannot interpret Mr. Bennet’s behaviour as the becoming coyness of “an elegant female.”

Mr. Collins’ heart is scarcely touched, but his vanity—thick-skinned as it is—has received a wound, for which, however, there is a speedy cure, since within three days he transfers his suit with the happiest result to Elizabeth’s friend Charlotte Lucas, who has not hesitated to plan this conclusion.

Elizabeth is amazed and hurt at the absence of right principle and feeling on the part of Charlotte, who has been so quickly wooed and won—nay, who has herself stooped to woo a man for whom she can have neither respect nor regard.

But in Jane Bennet’s remonstrances against the hard terms which Elizabeth uses when speaking of the marriage—in the emphasis with which the elder sister dwells on Mr. Collins’ respectable establishment as well as his unblemished character—above all, in the way in which Charlotte’s choice is made to turn out tolerably well for her in the end, we find that Jane Austen, while revolting at the conduct which she herself could never have practised, is inclined so far to endorse the reasoning of the prudent, steady gentlewoman who has offended against Elizabeth’s nobler instincts.

[Pg 71]

“Without thinking highly either of men or matrimony,” Jane Austen says of Charlotte Lucas, “marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservation from want. This preservation she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it.”

Poor Mrs. Bennet’s chagrin is complete. She is deprived of the opportunity of “marrying” one of her daughters very fairly. Lady Lucas is to have a daughter married first. And Charlotte Lucas is eventually to supplant Mrs. Bennet in her own house of Longbourn. Can the irony of destiny go farther?

The other new comer appears in a fresh officer who joins the militia regiment in Meryton. He is a Mr. Wickham, a young man of exceedingly attractive looks and manners, being as universally agreeable and sympathetic as Darcy is the reverse.

Elizabeth Bennet and Mr. Wickham are mutually struck with each other on their introduction in the High Street of Meryton, and the impression at first sight is confirmed when they spend an evening in company together, at a tea and supper party given by Mrs. Philips, the Bennets’ aunt.

Wickham’s place in the round game of cards for the young people is between Elizabeth and her boisterous young sister Lydia, who would have proceeded to engross the gentleman had it not been for the rival attractions of the game of “Lottery Tickets,” and her zeal in acquiring mother-of-pearl fishes—the old counters.

Elizabeth and Wickham are permitted to talk together and to discover how their views and tastes coincide. Not the least bond of union is the confirmation of Elizabeth’s worst prejudices against Mr. Darcy. Wickham happens also to be a Derbyshire man, and he has actually been brought up in the most intimate[Pg 72] relations with the Darcys. Wickham’s father was the confidential agent of Darcy’s father, who had been George Wickham’s godfather, and had charged himself with educating and providing for the lad. By appearing to respond unwillingly to the roused curiosity of Elizabeth, and by the flattery of giving her the idea that he is confiding in her alone, the young man manages, without seeming to be publicly proclaiming his wrongs, to convey to her the information of how badly he has been treated by young Darcy. This haughty, hard, unscrupulous man has defrauded his early companion of the church living bequeathed to him by his godfather. Darcy has a young sister, Georgiana, who had been very fond of her father’s favourite when he petted and played with her as a child, but her brother has infected her with the inordinate pride and selfishness of the family, and set her also against Wickham.

Elizabeth drinks in the whole story, which is a testimony to her own acuteness, is full of pity for Wickham and of wrath against Darcy.

The younger Miss Bennets have teased Mr. Bingley to give a ball, which comes off with great éclat at Netherfield. The host’s attentions to Jane Bennet are the talk of the room.

Mrs. Bennet goes so completely off her head that, to the intense mortification and shame of Elizabeth, she overhears her mother enlarging on her eldest daughter’s brilliant prospects to Lady Lucas, at the supper-table, with so little reserve, that Elizabeth is sure Darcy, who is opposite, is listening—first with grave surprise, and afterwards with an unsuppressed expression of scorn.

Indeed, poor Elizabeth is doomed to experience anything rather than pleasure at the long-looked-forward-to, much-talked-of, ball at Netherfield. In the earlier part of the evening she is disappointed by the non-appearance of Wickham with the other officers; and she is full of resentment against Darcy for having either deprived him of an invitation, or caused the injured young man to avoid the painful encounter, though he had expressly[Pg 73] told his warm adherent that it was not for him to go out of Mr. Darcy’s way.

Under the irritation produced by this suspicion, Elizabeth, when Darcy seeks her out, turns upon him with serious instead of playful antagonism. She mentions Wickham’s name, for the express purpose of observing Darcy’s annoyance. She provokes him to the cold observation that Mr. Wickham is well qualified to attract friends, but it remains to be seen whether he is equally fitted to retain them.

Elizabeth’s blood boils at the insinuation from the man who has so wronged her friend.

Then, as if the evil genius of the family had been at work, not Mrs. Bennet alone, but more of Elizabeth’s relations, make themselves obnoxious to censure and ridicule. Mary in her conceit consents, with her weak voice, to sing an after-supper song; and when it is received with forced approval, she volunteers to give another, amidst the covert smiles of her audience.

Elizabeth looks in agony to her father to interfere, lest Mary should go on singing all night; and he crowns the trying situation by one of his most ironical, disconcerting speeches.

“That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

One word on the terribly keen young eyes with which Elizabeth Bennet sees the faults and follies of her family, including her mother’s silliness, and the objectionable behaviour of her father in amusing himself at the expense of his wife, so as to risk rendering her an object of contempt in the eyes of her children.

No doubt, Elizabeth Bennet does not dream of being anything save respectful and dutiful to her father and mother, whom she addresses commonly with the old-fashioned, ceremonious “Sir” or “Madam.” The partiality of the former to her not only fills the young girl with honest filial pride, but it touches her indescribably[Pg 74] at a crisis in her history. She seeks to screen her mother, and she strives to improve her younger sisters.

Elizabeth Bennet would have died rather than proclaimed the shortcomings of her family—far less have been so lost to all wholesome shame as to have made game of what formed her greatest affliction. She is removed, by a world of good principle and good feeling, from those heroines of the present day whose authors write as if they considered the absence of all reverence and tenderness, in the sacred relation in which children stand to parents, as a mark of emancipation from old-fashioned prejudices, of freedom from what is goody-goody, narrow and obsolete. These desperately ill-bred, benighted, worse than heathen young people, in their professed confessions to the public, or their confidences to their fellow-puppets, speak evil of dignities with a vengeance, have nothing save an ugly grimace or a heartless gibe for all that is honourable in years, wisdom, or virtue, and for all that is holy in natural affection. They pour forth their railings and mockings at the authors of their being with an absolute profanity, a base disloyalty, and an absence of common decency in their family disclosures, which would be altogether horrible and hideous, were it not also absurdly false and despicable, as well as odious.

Elizabeth Bennet was a very different being—an essentially Christian and civilized gentlewoman.

But one is impelled to wish that, especially where her mother was concerned, there had been a greater reluctance, even an incapability, to judge and condemn—a piteous veil drawn by the strong over the weak, in a relationship in which these attributes ought to have been reversed. For, whether the offence be wickedness or vulgarity,—

“A mother is a mother still,
The holiest thing alive.”
Jane Austen would have said probably that if Elizabeth Bennet’s nearest relations were guilty of impropriety[Pg 75] and folly, she could not help seeing it. We know that the author herself was very happy in the family relations of which she proved herself worthy. She was a devoted daughter and loving sister, tempted to rest content with her own family circle, and to refuse, with a certain refined churlishness, other and wider associations. She may have been in his position who

“Jests at scars that never felt a wound.”
She could hardly perhaps realise, though she excelled in realising, how a good, affectionate girl, while forced in her sense and sincerity to condemn the failings of her kindred, yet instinctively shuts her eyes to them, so far as she can do so without moral injury to herself and others; or sees them through a half-shrouding mist of eager respect and faithful fondness for the merits which, in most cases, we may be thankful, balance the failings.

Besides, Jane Austen was very young when she wrote “Pride and Prejudice,” and gentle in some respects as youth may be, it is not from it that we are warranted in expecting charity. Youth at its best—a very sweet best, but with its sweetness consisting mainly of the unbounded promise of still better things—is in its ignorance, rashness, and unshaken self-confidence, impatient of all wrong-doing, nay, of all blundering, and intolerant to the wrong-doers and blunderers. It would be to rob the bountifulness of riper years of one of their chief gains if we were to deny them their prerogative of greater long-suffering with stupidity and pity for error.

In none of her other novels was Miss Austen quite so unsparing in her censure and withering in her satire—sufficiently provoked though it was—as in “Pride and Prejudice.” She is gentle to the comparatively harmless, kindly silliness and selfishness of Lady Bertram in “Mansfield Park;” while she is really tender, with a touch of pathos, to that worthiest and most lovable of old chatterboxes, Miss Bates, in “Emma.”

The Netherfield ball is fatal to Jane Bennet’s interest,[Pg 76] innocent as Jane is of any of the family misdemeanors on the occasion. Bingley has to leave the next day for London, from which he certainly means to return soon. But his sisters and friend suddenly make up their minds to follow him, with the intention, if they can manage it, that the household shall not come back to Netherfield for the winter. Caroline Bingley communicates the news of the step, which takes the whole neighbourhood by surprise, in a plausible note to the victim, Jane.

Elizabeth reads between the lines, and discerns the truth, that the sisters and Mr. Darcy have at last taken alarm, and are bent on putting an end to the attachment on Mr. Bingley’s part before it has gone the length of a declaration, by detaining the naturally light-hearted, easily-impressed young fellow among the excitements and distractions of the town, away from Netherfield.

The sequel shows the conspirators successful. Sweet Jane Bennet is ruthlessly jilted, while bearing no malice, and insisting in her confidential intercourse with her sister that the affair has been all a mistake, caused by her fancy, the partiality of her friends, and Bingley’s amiable desire to please. She declares she is sure she will soon forget it, and be as happy as before.

In the meantime, Jane has to endure the mortification of hearing her mother lament, openly and loudly, over the ill-usage which her daughter has received.

The modern match-making mother has more guile, if she is not more delicate-minded, than to betray her feelings in a similarly unreserved fashion.

Elizabeth hotly resents the wrong done to her dear and gentle sister, is furious with Darcy and Miss Bingley, and begins to despise Bingley for proving a mere tool in the hands of his friends, whose interference in his affairs has been utterly unjustifiable.

Elizabeth and Wickham’s mutual preference goes no further. She says afterwards that every girl within visiting distance of Meryton lost her senses for a time where the winning young officer was concerned. But she herself did not lose her senses to such an extent as[Pg 77] to be beyond recovering them; though the only remonstrance which reached her was on the indiscretion of allowing herself to be drawn into an attachment and engagement with a penniless officer, while she herself was little better provided for in a worldly sense, so that their marriage must either be impossible, or an event long deferred.

The warning, no doubt, has a mercenary ring, especially for young readers; but such worldly considerations were simply held reasonable in Jane Austen’s days, and reckless disregard of consequences and headstrong wilfulness in marriage, as in any other affair in life, were not qualities held up for admiration.

At the same time, Jane Austen was too true a woman not to deprecate what amounted to cold-blooded, calculating caution in marriage. More than once she exposes its fallacy and danger, and she has devoted a whole novel to show the injury which may be inflicted by over-carefulness on the part of a well-intentioned friend, and by over-submissiveness on the side of an amiable girl, in breaking off an engagement with a young man who had only his high character and hope of rising in his profession as hostages to fortune.

Elizabeth Bennet and Wickham’s mere liking for each other rather dwindles away after a time than meets with a sharp check; and Elizabeth considers that if they had been sufficiently in love they might have justifiably faced the risks of a long engagement and a poor marriage—even while she tries to be so hardened and cynical a philosopher as to think and say that Wickham is doing what he ought in withdrawing his attentions gradually from her, and setting himself to pay his addresses to a girl in Meryton who has nothing in particular to distinguish her save that she has recently inherited a fortune. This worldly argument is forced work by Elizabeth, and when she is a very little older and wiser she recants, and is affronted by the coarseness of sentiment into which her determination to be indifferent and reasonable had led her.

[Pg 78]

II.
In the following spring Elizabeth Bennet accompanies Sir William Lucas and his daughter Maria, travelling post, to pay her old friend Charlotte a visit in her Kent parsonage.

Any little awkwardness and coolness—there never was estrangement—between the friends have died out; “a good memory is inexcusable in such a case.” Elizabeth only recollects that she was Mr. Collins’ first choice when she has a passing comical impression that he is showing off his excellent garden and comfortable house, not without a design of letting her feel all she has lost.

But Mr. Collins is well content, as he may be, with the sensible, good-tempered wife who, in making the best of the home she has secured for herself, fully recognises that it is for her dignity to keep up his; though she encourages him to spend a great part of his time in working in his garden, and has her sitting-room at the back of the house, since, if it had commanded a view of the lane, and the passers-by, it would have been apt to entail on her a large portion of her husband’s spare time and company.

Elizabeth has the honour of being included along with the Lucases in the Collins summons, twice a week, to relieve the dulness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh’s family party at Rosings, and of being patronised and dictated to by Lady Catherine, a domineering, self-sufficient woman, who tells Mr. Collins how to manage his parish, Mrs. Collins how to keep her house and rear her poultry, Elizabeth how to practise her music, and Maria Lucas how to pack her trunk.

With the exception of Charlotte and Elizabeth, the recipients of these favours are overwhelmed, and awed into the humblest gratitude and obedience. Charlotte looks over Lady Catherine’s foibles, because they belong “to a superior woman and kind neighbour,”[Pg 79] exactly as the judicious young matron takes care to value at the highest rate all the advantages of her position, and to ignore as far as possible its drawbacks, thus contriving to remain tolerably satisfied with her lot.

Elizabeth, entirely undazzled by the assumption and splendour which prevail at Rosings, amuses herself with detecting a resemblance between Mr. Darcy and his aunt, and feels satisfied that Lady Catherine’s only child, Miss de Bourgh, a sickly, supercilious girl, with a large fortune, who is designed for her cousin, will make him a fit wife.

Darcy and Colonel Fitzwilliam, another nephew of Lady Catherine’s, arrive on a visit at Rosings, while Elizabeth and Maria Lucas are still staying at Hunsford Vicarage, which is only divided by the lane and the park palings from the great house.

Naturally, the two young men, whatever the aristocratic trammels under which they labour, are attracted daily to the more congenial society of the parsonage. For that matter, Colonel Fitzwilliam, though the younger son of an earl, is agreeable and unassuming, likely to make himself happy among any fairly well-born and well-educated young people, and especially with a pretty, witty young girl like Elizabeth Bennet.

But even Darcy, under stress of circumstances, thaws considerably. He pays his homage unmistakably in the same quarter as that which attracts his cousin, and betrays considerable annoyance and shame when his aunt’s impertinence is directed at Elizabeth.

With regard to the great lady, she is so firmly convinced of her own supreme deserts and those of her daughter, that she does not so much as see the strong inclination to defection on the part of the gentlemen. Elizabeth Bennet likes Colonel Fitzwilliam, and is rather surprised to find that he is on cordial cousinly terms with Darcy. It does not mollify her in the least to discover that the latter seeks to renew their acquaintance on a more intimate footing, and perplexes Mrs. Collins by the extent of his civilities to the parsonage.

[Pg 80]

Elizabeth avoids the man she detests as much as she can; and when she has the ill luck to encounter him in the pretty country walks, and the strolls in Rosings Park, of which she is the only lady in the house to avail herself, she expressly mentions to him, without a grain of coquetry, her favourite path, that no untoward accident may occur again. She attributes the circumstance that she still meets Mr. Darcy to his letting himself come in the way, as a resource for sheer idleness, if not with the express purpose of spoiling her walk. He turns and walks with her without getting any encouragement, asks odd questions as to her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins’ happiness, and—most unaccountable eccentricity of all—seems to imply, when they are talking of the rooms at Rosings, that the next time he and she are in Kent, she too will be staying at the great house, instead of at the parsonage. Elizabeth wonders, is momentarily put out, and thinks no more of it.

In a conversation between Elizabeth and Colonel Fitzwilliam, just before the two gentlemen are to take their departure, after the Colonel has mentioned that they would have been gone long ago, if Darcy had not, again and again, put off their leaving Rosings, and Elizabeth has hinted that Mr. Darcy has no objection to direct his friends’ movements, the talk turns on Darcy’s well-known influence over his great friend Bingley. Fitzwilliam, in his ignorance, refers to a service which Darcy has done this friend, and of which the benefactor has spoken to his cousin, without, however, mentioning names. Darcy has congratulated himself on having been able to rescue a friend from the misfortune of contracting a very undesirable marriage.

Elizabeth, understanding the allusion, feels her blood boil at what she regards as a heartless boast thus unconsciously repeated to one interested in the transaction. After she has parted from her innocent informant, she occupies herself with re-reading Jane’s last letters, and imagines she sees in them proofs of broken spirits and impaired tranquillity.

[Pg 81]

Elizabeth is herself so troubled that she pleads with reason a violent headache to excuse her from accompanying the Collins’ and Maria Lucas to dine at Rosings. Elizabeth feels she cannot encounter Darcy with calmness, after this confirmation of the injury he has inflicted on her sister.

In the course of the evening Elizabeth Bennet is startled by a ring at the door-bell. To her utter amazement, Mr. Darcy walks in. He has left the party at Rosings, and he at once imputes his visit to a wish to hear that she is better.

Elizabeth answers with cold civility.

He rises and walks about the room, comes towards her in an agitated manner, and bursts forth “In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love you!”

Elizabeth’s astonishment is beyond expression. She stares, colours, doubts, and is silent. “For once a young lady is incredulous on the subject of a proposal made to her.”

Darcy treats her silence as sufficient encouragement, and proceeds to plead his cause—speaking well, like the able man he is.

But, unfortunately, there are other feelings than love to be described, and he is as eloquent on his pride—of which he has never learnt to be ashamed—on the contrary, he has always been proud of his pride—as on his tenderness. With great candour, but little tact, he expatiates on the obstacles his attachment has had to overcome, refers to her inferior position, and lets it be plainly seen he considers an alliance with her family in one sense a degradation.

In short, Mr. Darcy pays his addresses in a high and mighty fashion, which belonged as much to the privileges of the great “quality” of the period as to the man.

Little wonder that, though he urges with some justice the strength of a regard which has been proof[Pg 82] against such trials, and claims its due reward in her acceptance of his hand—speaking of apprehension and anxiety, but with his countenance expressing real security, so that it is evident he has no doubt of a favourable answer—a high-spirited girl like Elizabeth Bennet, who already looks upon herself as aggrieved by this man, her sister’s worst enemy, should become exasperated into forgetting her first sense of the compliment of Darcy’s affection, and pity for his inevitable disappointment.

With hardly more humility than he has displayed, she gives him his answer. She waives with disdain the usual expressions of obligation. She declares she cannot thank him. She has never desired his good opinion, and it is certain he has bestowed it most unwillingly. She is sorry to cause pain to any one. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and she hopes will be of short duration. The feelings which he has just told her have long prevented the acknowledgment of his regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation.

Mr. Darcy, who is leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, hears her with as much resentment as surprise or pain. In fact, it is with the white heat of anger, rather than the extremity of grief, that his complexion grows pale; and when he has put just enough force on himself to speak calmly, it is with imperiousness and not with despair—above all, without the most distant idea of stooping to implore her mercy—that he demands, “And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting? I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little endeavour at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”

Thus pressed and goaded, Elizabeth speaks her mind with passionate, youthful freedom as well as dignity and scorn. She accuses him of a design to offend and insult her, by choosing to tell her he likes her against his will, against his reason, even against his character. She[Pg 83] asks if he could think that, though her feelings had not decided against him, though they had been indifferent, even favourable, any consideration could ever induce her to marry a man who has destroyed the happiness of a beloved sister?

He is guilty of saying that he has been kinder to Bingley than to himself.

She retorts that she has long ago known his character from Mr. Wickham, and dares him to contradict what she has heard.

His hasty exclamation, “You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s concerns!” betrays that jealousy is the first emotion aroused by her reproach.

But when she goes on to protest against the injuries he has inflicted on his father’s godson, in withholding from him what Darcy must have known to be his due, other feelings are awakened in her hearer.

“And this,” he cries, as he walks with quick steps across the room, “is your opinion of me? This is the estimation in which you hold me? I thank you for explaining it so freely. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed.”

But he is not so much hurt that pride and resentment are not to have the last word. He stops his indignant cry, to assert that perhaps his offences might have been overlooked if he had not wounded her pride by the honest confession of his scruples. Her bitter accusations might have been suppressed if he had flattered her with the belief that he was impelled by unqualified inclination. But he is not ashamed of the feelings he has related. They were natural and just. Could she expect him to rejoice in the inferiority of her connexions?

Here is the most masterful of incensed lovers. But he meets his match in the most resolute of indignant girls.

“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy,” Elizabeth says, with all the calmness she can summon to her aid, “if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected[Pg 84] me in any other way than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt, in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.”

She sees him start at this terrible home-thrust, and she is not inclined to be magnanimous in pursuing her advantage. “You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it,” she adds. Surely this is enough. But the obvious astonishment with which he hears her, the expression of mingled incredulity and mortification with which he looks at her, spurs on the intrepid, wrathful girl to explain further that from the very beginning—from the first moment of their acquaintance almost—his manners have impressed her with the fullest belief in his arrogance and conceit. She speaks out the disapprobation which has ended in invincible dislike, and winds up with the somewhat gratuitous statement that she had not known him a month before she felt that he was the last man in the world whom she could ever be prevailed on to marry.

Rash, foolish—if perfectly sincere—words can go no further.

“You have said quite enough, madam,” Darcy puts an end to the altercation. “I perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.”

So the stormy interview terminates, and Elizabeth is left to recover from the tumult of her feelings, though it is too soon for her to be sorry for having spoken so many vehement words in her anger.

Of course, Elizabeth keeps an honourable silence on what has befallen her. She has no confidante save her own thoughts, and she is reduced next morning to walking out alone to indulge them in peace, when again she sees a gentleman in the distance. This time she retreats from him, but she hears Mr. Darcy’s voice repeat her name. She has no choice save to stop and face him.

[Pg 85]

He comes up, holds out a letter, and saying quietly and haughtily, “Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” bows himself off.

With the strongest curiosity, though with no expectation of pleasure, Elizabeth opens the letter, and is still more surprised to find it contains two sheets (the old, spacious sheets) written quite through in a close hand, with the cover also full.

The letter is not a love-letter, or a letter of apology; it is simply a vindication of the writer’s character from the charges which Elizabeth had impulsively brought against it.

In the first part, which deals with the accusation against Darcy for having deliberately separated Bingley and Jane, he begins by making the small atonement of emphatically declaring that he had acted under a mistaken impression. He has been persuaded that, while his friend was rapidly becoming attached to Miss Bennet, she, on her part, was still sufficiently indifferent to him to prevent her happiness being seriously implicated in the affair. In this light, Darcy has thought himself at liberty to take all lawful means to hinder the marriage for his friend’s sake, while he himself was still successfully struggling with his admiration for Elizabeth.

In recapitulating the objections to the marriage, the writer sins afresh, and worse than ever where his reader’s feelings are concerned. He writes some very plain and hard words of the Bennet family which, in the middle of his strong determination to clear himself, he must have known would wound Elizabeth to the quick. He says that the inferiority of her mother’s origin, however much to be regretted, is nothing in comparison with that total want of propriety so frequently—almost so uniformly—betrayed by Mrs. Bennet herself, by Elizabeth’s three younger sisters, and occasionally even by her father.

Apparently, Darcy has relented a little after writing these harsh words, for in the next sentence he does ask her shortly to pardon him. He protests it pains him to[Pg 86] offend her. He even goes a little out of his way, to bid her, in her concern for the defects of her relations, and her displeasure with him for unreservedly pointing them out, take comfort from the consideration that she and her elder sister have so conducted themselves as to escape any share of the censure liberally bestowed on the others. He says, with lurking tenderness, under the guise of stern justice, that the exemption is honourable to the sense and disposition both of Jane and Elizabeth.

In proceeding to dispose of her violent advocacy of Wickham’s cause and consequent severe aspersions of his own character, Darcy treats the subject as more serious, and here the higher nature of the man comes in. In proportion to the greater injury done him, he grows calmer, more reasonable, almost magnanimous. With a manly self-restraint and absence of all invective, which are in themselves proofs of his honesty of purpose, he consents to make plain to her, at whatever sacrifices of his pride and reserve, how very different from what she supposes have been his relations with Wickham. He even puts himself to the pain of entrusting to her honour a portion of the story which involves another member of his family, the young sister to whom he is confessedly the best of brothers, in order to complete the exposure of the wholesale misrepresentation, the tangled web of truth and falsehood, with which Wickham has deceived her.

While young men at college together, Darcy knew how far Wickham fell short of the elder Darcy’s good opinion, without attempting to deprive the lad of his patron’s favour. In those days Wickham had shown himself as disinclined, as he was unfit, to take orders; and at the death of his godfather, who had only recommended him to the family living conditionally—on his proving suitable, and on the younger Darcy’s approbation of the presentation—Wickham had announced his objections to the step proposed, and had accepted £3,000 as an equivalent. It was not till after he had[Pg 87] failed in studying for the bar, and when he had wasted the money he had received, that he had again applied to Darcy with cool effrontery, professing his readiness to comply with the necessary conditions, and claiming the presentation to the living.

On Darcy’s refusal, Wickham had attempted to revenge himself, and at the same time to secure Georgiana Darcy’s fortune of £30,000 by renewing his acquaintance with Darcy’s sister, and making use of her childish affection for him, until he had sufficiently ingratiated himself with the inexperienced girl of fifteen, to induce her to believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement with him. Georgiana was only saved from a miserable fate by the affection for the elder brother who had been like a second father to her, which caused her, at the last moment, to refuse to go any further in deceiving and defying him, and to confess to him her foolish intention.

Darcy ends his letter by referring Elizabeth Bennet for confirmation of his account, should she be inclined to question it, to his cousin. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who is acquainted with the entire particulars, and who can have no motive in misleading her.

Then with the revived regret and charity with which a man will say farewell to the woman he has loved—and loves still, in spite of her cruel treatment of him—he bids God bless her, before he signs himself Fitzwilliam Darcy.

Elizabeth reads eagerly, with a throng of conflicting emotions. She commences by being incredulous. “This could not be true,” she says of his assertion that he has thought Jane free from any special partiality for Bingley, while she writhes under the cutting references to her other relations and their exhibition of themselves at the Netherfield ball.

Again she cries out with still more energy, “This must be false,” when she comes to the temperate statement of Wickham’s misconduct and absolute untrustworthiness.

[Pg 88]

But as she reads, and re-reads, and reflects on the contents of the letter, the girl’s good sense, her own fairness and truthfulness come to her aid against the rooted prejudice which had so blinded her judgment—finding ample food as it did in the besetting sin of Darcy, which reflected itself in his unpopular and unconciliatory manner, in contrast with the superficially pleasant address, masking the unprincipled selfishness of Wickham.

Elizabeth is forced to see how completely she has been taken in, how little ground she has had to go upon in either case, save vanity piqued on the one hand and gratified on the other. She shrinks abashed before her own errors of observation and reasoning—she who has been so proud of her penetration and cleverness.

She hates to remember her zealous support of Wickham, of whom she had literally known nothing, except that he was handsome and agreeable, and from the stories he has told her himself with a frankness which, even if he had been perfectly sincere, would have been imprudent and indelicate in so recent an acquaintance.

She recoils from the recollection of her sharpness and uncalled-for taunts to Darcy, and is brought to admit that his warm, constant regard for her, in the teeth of her unconcealed dislike to him, has been no common compliment from such a man; though she must still think that he urged his suit in an improper and unamiable manner.

When Elizabeth returns to Longbourn, she is doubtful whether or not she ought to tell so much of what she has learned of Wickham’s real character as to open the eyes of their common acquaintances; but hearing, to her immense relief, that the militia regiment stationed at Meryton is under orders to go into camp at Brighton, and that Wickham must leave the neighbourhood, in company with the rest of the officers, in the course of a fortnight, she resolves, with the approval of her sister Jane, who has been the astonished listener to all Elizabeth’s adventures, to leave Wickham[Pg 89] the opportunity of redeeming the past, by refraining from the uncongenial task of exposing him to his associates.

The two younger Miss Bennets, in company with the more thoughtless girls of their immediate circle, are sunk in the depths of despair at the prospect of the loss of liveliness in their society, which the removal of the regiment involves. But Lydia, who has been loudest in her lamentations, is more than consoled, for the present, by an invitation from the wife of the colonel of the regiment, a newly-married woman, little older and hardly less empty-headed than Lydia herself, to accompany her on a visit to Brighton.

As Lydia’s ideas of felicity are summed up in flirting noisily with six officers at once, Brighton and its camp appear like Paradise to her.

In some respects, Lydia Bennet and George Wickham are not unlike the fast heroine and lady-killing hero of many modern novels. It is edifying to contemplate the unqualified contempt and reprobation with which Jane Austen viewed the couple.

Elizabeth Bennet is so conscious of the risk and harm to Lydia, in allowing her to go to a town which combines all the disadvantages of a watering-place and regimental quarters with such slender guardianship as that of her friend, Mrs. Foster, that the elder sister feels bound to risk giving mortal offence to Lydia, and incurring the indignation of their mother, who is nearly as bent on her daughter’s paying the undesirable visit, as is the forward, spoilt girl of sixteen on her own account. So Elizabeth goes to her father, and urges him to keep her youngest sister at home.

But Mr. Bennet will not be stirred up to exercise his authority. He is as convinced as anybody can be of the silliness and folly of Lydia, but, acting on his usual plan, he is more inclined to laugh at her than to try to restrain her. Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself at some public place, and she could never do it at less expense and inconvenience[Pg 90] to her family. They will have no peace at Longbourn if she does not go to Brighton. As the officers will find women better worth their notice there, let her relations hope Lydia may be taught her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorising them in locking her up for the rest of her life.

III.
Elizabeth has a gratification in store for her, to which she has long looked forward, so simple and common a one in this generation, that it is refreshing to hear how much, even in anticipation, a trip to the Lakes or to Derbyshire has been to the untravelled girl, with her fresh, unjaded tastes. In the same way, it is touching to read in some of the last published letters of Charlotte Brontë how the gifted, hard-faring woman was disposed to think a week by the sea, which she had not seen before, in the company of a congenial friend, implied almost too much happiness for this world.

The Bennets have an uncle and aunt in London, in trade, like the rest of their mother’s relations, inhabiting a house in the City region of Gracechurch Street, but who are in all other respects different from Mrs. Bennet and the Philips in Meryton. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner are sensible, intelligent, amiable people, much esteemed by their elder nieces. The couple have promised to take Elizabeth with them on a summer tour of a month’s duration to the Lakes; the idea cheers and consoles the girl under a hundred depressing and mortifying influences.

As it happens, Mr. Gardiner cannot go so far as the Lakes, and the expedition is limited to Derbyshire,[Pg 91] with its dales, towns, and great houses, its Peak, and its caverns. Elizabeth enjoys herself heartily, without an arrière pensée, till the excursion brings the party to the little town of Lambton, where Mrs. Gardiner had once lived for several years, and where she has still old acquaintances. Elizabeth is aware that Lambton is within a mile or two of Mr. Darcy’s estate and house of Pemberley. She cannot be without some curiosity to see the fine place, of which, had she so chosen, she might have been by this time mistress. Therefore, when her companions, who are in complete ignorance of their niece’s special interest in Pemberley, propose to drive to it, as one of the show-places of the neighbourhood, Elizabeth, having carefully ascertained that not one of the family is at home, willingly consents to accompany her uncle and aunt.

Jane Austen hardly ever describes scenery. The criticism on a recent tale, that there is not much of human nature but a great deal about the weather in the book, could never have been spoken of her stories. The fashion in the fiction of her day tended to two extremes—to the gorgeous ideal foreign landscape of Mrs. Radcliffe, or to the ignoring of inanimate nature in all save the barest accessories, practised by Mrs. Inchbald and Fanny Burney. Jane Austen preferred the latter style of treatment; her interest is not merely centred in her men and women, it is monopolised by them. As in the old tragic ballads, which were yet so far removed from her stories, there seems no time for elaborate analyses of earth, sea, and sky, with the moulding of these mute forces into subtle sympathy, or clashing discord with men’s moods, a tendency which belongs to artificial and self-conscious art.

Yet we receive the impression that Jane Austen loved the country and country walks. Once and again she paints little landscape pictures which indicate her taste and feeling. As might have been expected in her generation, she shows her preference for rich, cultivated, smiling, or at most prettily picturesque, thoroughly[Pg 92] domestic scenery. Her description of Pemberley Park is one of her rare bits of landscape. She dwells with much approbation—not only on the large, handsome stone building (the age which revels in mellow brick, and puts Queen Anne, not to say Queen Elizabeth, houses, far before Georgian mansions, had not yet arrived), standing well on a rising ground—but also on the ridge of wooded hills which forms the background, and on the stream of some natural importance, and “swelled” into still greater, but without any artificial appearance, with banks which are neither formal nor falsely adorned, that constitutes the foreground. One has no difficulty in conjuring up the place—somewhat heavy, yet stately and tranquil, with its stretches of fine wood, its open vistas contrived for “prospects,” and its careful adaptation of the fall of the ground to “a valley narrowing into a glen,” according to the principles of the landscape gardening of the period.

Elizabeth is disinterestedly delighted. She feels that to be mistress of Pemberley might have been something. She is no less pleased with the house, and its lofty, well-proportioned rooms, each window commanding a charming view; the furniture suitable to the fortune of the owner, but neither gaudy nor needlessly fine, with less splendour but more real elegance than the furniture at Rosings. “And of this place,” thinks Elizabeth, with some pardonable hankering, “I might have been mistress. With these rooms I might have been familiarly acquainted. Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But, no—” a wholesome recollection stops the current of her thoughts in time—“I should not have been allowed to invite them.”

The housekeeper, an elderly, respectable-looking woman, much more civil and less fine than Elizabeth had expected, shows the visitors over the house. After Elizabeth has recovered from a momentary alarm, and made a mental note of thanksgiving that they have not[Pg 93] come a day later, on the servant’s observing that she expects her master the next morning with a large party of friends, the girl is able to listen with a mixture of feelings, in which wonder and bewilderment are not the least, to the talk which goes on among the others as the family pictures are being looked at. The housekeeper, on finding by some words which drop from Mrs. Gardiner that Elizabeth is acquainted with her master, begins to speak of him with honest pride and warmth. How good a master and landlord he is! How affectionate a brother! How kind to the poor! Does the young lady not think him a very handsome gentleman?

“Very handsome,” answers poor Elizabeth briefly.

One example of the praise thus freely bestowed strikes Elizabeth as of all others the most extraordinary. “I have never had a cross word from him in his life, and I have known him ever since he was four years old,” declares the old servant. And yet, if there was one fault more than another which Elizabeth Bennet had been accustomed to ascribe unhesitatingly to the lordly bear, Darcy, it was a bad temper; but, according to this credible witness, the bear abroad must be a lamb at home.

As Elizabeth digests the reflections aroused by this evidence, and looks at a full-length portrait of the master of the house, in which the face wears such a smile as she had noticed sometimes on the lips of the living man when he looked at her, she feels a deeper sentiment of gratitude than she has yet experienced for the love which had been so strong, though there was little of the courtier in the lover.

The little party are consigned to the gardener, who is conducting them across the lawn to the river. Elizabeth has turned back to look again. Her uncle and aunt have stopped also, and are conjecturing the date of the house, when its owner comes suddenly forward from the road leading to the stables.

The two so much interested are within twenty yards[Pg 94] of each other, and cannot avoid an encounter. Their eyes meet; both grow crimson. He absolutely starts, and for a moment seems immovable with surprise, but shortly recovering himself, advances and speaks to Elizabeth with perfect civility, if not perfect composure.

Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner recognise Mr. Darcy from his resemblance to his picture and from the exclamation of the gardener. They stand a little aloof, while the new comer and their niece exchange greetings.

In the meantime Elizabeth is reduced to a state of extreme confusion and discomfort. She scarcely dares lift her eyes to her quondam lover’s face. She cannot forget, and she knows he must recall with equal vividness, the circumstances under which they parted at Hunsford.

She is keenly alive to the impropriety, the indelicacy of his finding her at Pemberley. Why did she come? or why has he thus returned a day before he was expected? How strange her being there must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light may it not strike so vain a man! For Elizabeth still holds forlornly to the last rag of the mental and moral habiliments in which she clothed him. She clings to the conviction of his high opinion of himself and his deserts. But, in spite of herself, amidst all the jumble of sensations which his appearance has excited, none is more distinct or strikes her more forcibly, than the realisation that he is heaping coals of fire on her head, by behaving to the girl who had rejected him—well-nigh with contumely—with the greatest, most sedulous courtesy that a true gentleman could show on such a trying occasion. More than that, there is a complete alteration in his whole tone, which she cannot fail to observe, that might have been perceptible even to a stranger. He has overcome his old aversion to the small polite forms and genialities of social intercourse, along with his old stiffness and coldness. He puts himself to the trouble of inquiring for the very relations he stigmatised, as well as for herself. He asks when she has left home, and how long she[Pg 95] means to stay in Derbyshire. He is interested in her answers. He is animated and agreeable, in the middle of his evident agitation, for the first time since she has known him. His words only fail him when his last idea deserts him, and, after standing a moment silent, he recollects himself, and takes his leave.

Elizabeth is full of astonishment in her distress, and all the time she walks about the grounds, mechanically responding to their praises on the part of her companions, and hearing the gardener triumphantly announce that the park is ten miles round, she is puzzling out the riddle, asking herself what Mr. Darcy thinks of her; whether she is still dear to him, in defiance of everything? She cannot tell, not even from her own heart, if he has felt most pain or pleasure in seeing her again; but certainly he has not been at ease.

While the visitors are still wandering about, Elizabeth is again surprised by seeing Darcy at a little distance coming towards them. For a moment she thinks he will strike into another path, but when a turn of the road shows him still advancing, and preparing to greet them with all his newly-acquired cordiality, she determines to emulate him, and gets out the words “delightful,” “charming,” when it strikes her that praise of Pemberley from her may be misconstrued, and she colours and is silent.

Darcy asks if she will do him the honour of introducing her friends.

This is a stroke of civility which even yet Elizabeth did not expect. She cannot suppress a smile at his seeking the acquaintance of some of the very people against whom, viewed as her connections, his pride had revolted. “What will be his surprise,” she thinks, with girlish glee in her reviving spirits, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of fashion.”

As she names the Gardiners’ relationship to herself, she steals a mischievous glance at Darcy, to see how he bears it. She is not without a suspicion that he will decamp, as fast as he can, from such disgraceful companions.

[Pg 96]

On the contrary, though he is surprised, he bears the news with apparent fortitude, and, so far from going away, turns and walks with them, entering into conversation with Mr. Gardiner.

Elizabeth cannot but be pleased—cannot but triumph. It is consoling that Darcy should know she has some relations for whom there is no need to blush. She listens attentively to all that passes, and glories in every sentence of her uncle’s which marks his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.

Soon Elizabeth hears Mr. Darcy invite her uncle, who is fond of fishing, to fish in the stream while he is in the neighbourhood. Elizabeth says nothing, but it gratifies her exceedingly; the compliment must be all to herself. In place of continuing to torment herself with the reproach “Why has she been so foolish as to visit Pemberley?” she begins to ask more agreeable questions. “Why is he so altered? It cannot be for me? It cannot be for my sake his manners are thus softened? It is impossible he should still love me.”

Elizabeth finds an opportunity, when Mrs. Gardiner has taken her husband’s arm, and their niece has been forced to walk behind with Darcy, to let him know she had not expected to see him there, observing that his return must have been unexpected, since his housekeeper had said he would certainly not be back till to-morrow.

He tells her he had ridden on before his party, to arrange some business with his steward. His sister and the others—among whom are old acquaintances of hers, Mr. Bingley and his sisters—will follow early the following morning.

Elizabeth simply bows. Her thoughts fly back to the last occasion on which Mr. Bingley’s name was mentioned between them, and if she may judge by his complexion, his mind is not very differently engaged.

But Mr. Darcy is still to give the crowning proof of his condonement of Elizabeth’s offence, and his unshaken—if possible, increased—respect for her. He tells her there is one person in his party who particularly wishes[Pg 97] to be known to her. Will she allow him or does he ask too much, to introduce his sister to her acquaintance during her stay in Derbyshire?

This flattering request from the proud, exclusive, great man of the neighbourhood, who is naturally still more exclusive for his young sister than for himself, is delicate homage indeed, such as Elizabeth is well qualified to appreciate. Any desire Miss Darcy has to know her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking further, it is very gratifying to have this strong testimony that his resentment has not made him think really ill of her.

Elizabeth hardly knows how she accedes to the petition, only it cannot have been very ungraciously. He wishes her to walk into the house, but she excuses herself, saying she is not tired, and the two stand together on the lawn talking indefatigably of Matlock and Dovedale, to avoid an awkward silence, till the Gardiners came up, when, after a renewed and pressing invitation to enter the house and take some refreshment, Mr. Darcy hands the ladies into the carriage.

Elizabeth has to listen to her uncle and aunt’s remarks on the Squire of Pemberley, who, in spite of his formidable reputation for hauteur and reserve, has shown himself “perfectly well-behaved, polite, and unassuming.” “I can now say with the housekeeper,” ends Mrs. Gardiner, with a great deal more point than she is aware of, “that though some people may call him proud, I have seen nothing of it.”

The probability of such a reformation of manners on Darcy’s part remains an open question. Perhaps the sudden change in him is one of the most unlikely occurrences which happen in Jane Austen’s life-like novels. But her readers must remember that Darcy was only eight-and-twenty years of age. He was a young man of high character and many fine qualities, though these had been warped by the false self-importance which was the result of the over-indulged, isolated, really narrow experience of the only son and heir of a great family,[Pg 98] confined largely to the circle of his own friends—at the utmost his dependents. And the influence brought to bear on Darcy, with such telling effect, was his strong attachment to the bright, true-hearted girl who told him his faults so plainly, yet who could not alienate him, partly because of the single-heartedness of her nature, partly because of the elements of nobility in his. Love and his mistress, acting together on good principles which had been suffered to lie dormant, were Darcy’s teachers, and at twenty-eight such teachers are still powerful.

The gradual change of Elizabeth’s feelings towards Darcy is wrought out with great skill.

Darcy is so eager to fulfil his intention with regard to Elizabeth Bennet and his sister, that on the very afternoon of Georgiana’s arrival at home he drives her over to the inn in Lambton, where the Gardiners are staying.

Elizabeth has not been able to tell her uncle and aunt the compliment which she is to receive, and her confusion when the Pemberley livery is seen in the streets, together with the effort to be calm, impresses them with a new idea. There is no way to account for so marked attentions from such a quarter, unless by supposing a partiality for their niece—a supposition highly acceptable to the worthy uncle and aunt.

Elizabeth finds Miss Darcy, who is a ladylike girl, though not pretty, no alarming critic. She is shy instead of proud, but her shyness does not prevent her from being eager to like the friend her brother has presented to her.

A few minutes afterwards Bingley also “waits upon” Elizabeth, and is as friendly as of old. Her anger against him has vanished long ago. She is glad to see him again. She is pleased to fancy that he looks at her once or twice as if he were seeking to trace a resemblance between her and Jane. He is clearly on terms of simple friendship with Georgiana Darcy, for whom his sister, in complacently contemplating the possibility of a[Pg 99] double family match, has designed him. And Elizabeth believes she detects a regretful remembrance in the tone in which he refers to its having been a long time since he has seen her. She approves of the promptness and exactness of the mental calculation which follows: “It is above eight months; we have not met since the 20th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”

An invitation to dine at Pemberley follows. It is accepted with pleasure by the Gardiners, under the agreeable persuasion that Mr. Darcy is much better acquainted with Elizabeth than her friends had any idea of; in fact, that he is very much in love with her. Of the gentleman’s feelings there can be no doubt; with regard to the sentiments of the lady—whom her relatives do not choose to embarrass by pressing for her confidence on the great conquest of which she has been far from boasting—there is still an interesting uncertainty.

Once more in agitating circumstances Elizabeth visits Pemberley, in paying the return call which she and her aunt make upon Miss Darcy prior to the dinner.

Miss Darcy is as hospitable as her shyness will allow. Darcy comes in and shows how anxious he is that Elizabeth and his sister should get better acquainted.

Miss Bingley and Mrs. Hurst are the marplots. They greet Elizabeth with no more than a curtsey, till, in the imprudence of anger at the master of the house’s manner towards one of his guests, Caroline Bingley, who has been watching the pair jealously, calls out, “Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ——shire militia removed from Meryton? They must be a great loss to your family.”

The impertinence stings more than one of the listeners, in a way which the speaker has never contemplated. The friend to whom Miss Bingley professes herself to be devoted, Georgiana Darcy, is yet more distressed than Elizabeth at the association with Wickham which the mention of the militia regiment calls up, while Darcy actually neglects to watch the effect of the malicious speech on Elizabeth, in his sympathy with his young sister.

[Pg 100]

The callers are no sooner gone than Miss Bingley expatiates on how ill Eliza Bennet is looking. She has never in her life seen any one so much altered. Eliza Bennet has grown quite brown and coarse.

Mr. Darcy confesses he has seen no alteration in Miss Elizabeth Bennet, save her being tanned—no miraculous consequence of travelling in summer.

The infatuated woman is not to be silenced. She pulls every feature of her successful rival’s face to pieces. Elizabeth’s face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliance; her nose lacks character; her eyes, which have been called fine, possess a sharp, shrewish look.

Darcy remains resolutely silent.

His assailant, unfortunately for herself, is determined he shall speak. “I remember when we first met in Hertfordshire,” she continues in an airy strain, “how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty;[15] and I particularly recollect your saying one night after they had been dining at Netherfield, ‘She a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’ But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.”

“Yes,” replies Darcy, who can contain himself no longer, “but that was only when I first knew her, for it is many months since I have considered her one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”

Well done, Mr. Darcy! always fearless in announcing even a change of opinion, and now loyal to the absent, and true to your mistress’s colours!

A terrible catastrophe is at hand.

That dinner-party at Pemberley never takes place. Elizabeth has been expecting a letter from Jane, and wondering at its non-arrival.

The delay is explained by two letters coming at one time, and the Gardiners set out to visit some of Mrs.[Pg 101] Gardiner’s old friends, leaving Elizabeth at the inn to go leisurely through the home news. They are of an alarming, disastrous description. Lydia has eloped from Brighton with Wickham. The worst reports are in circulation with regard to his debts and his disreputable character. The family at Longbourn are in the utmost distress. Mr. Bennet has followed the fugitive pair to London, where Mr. Gardiner is implored to join him. Elizabeth is summoned home immediately.

As Elizabeth reads the letters in the height of dismay, passionately lamenting what is likely to be the miserable fate of her youngest sister, keenly sensible of the disgrace brought on the whole family, bitterly blaming herself for having abstained from letting her circle know what she had heard against Wickham when she was at Hunsford, Mr. Darcy is shown into the room.

“Oh, where is my uncle?” Elizabeth has just been crying to herself, and she has no further words for her visitor than a hurried “I beg your pardon, but I must leave you. I must find Mr. Gardiner this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to lose.”

Before he has time to think, he calls out, “What is the matter?” then begs to go himself, or to send a servant after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. He fears she is ill. He cannot leave her in such a state. With the utmost gentleness and consideration he urges her to let him help her, to suffer him to call her maid, to get her a glass of wine.

Elizabeth is forced to explain herself. There is nothing wrong with her health. She is only grieved by dreadful tidings from Longbourn, and at the words she bursts into tears. After having said so much it is idle to withhold the rest of the truth; indeed, the scandal must be over the whole country soon.

Elizabeth tells Darcy her youngest sister has eloped and is in the power of Mr. Wickham. She breaks off to reproach herself anew. She might have prevented it, if[Pg 102] she had but explained some part of what she had learnt to her family. But it is too late! too late! and Darcy might have said, “I told you so. The tables are turned with a vengeance.” But he is only amazed, sorry, shocked. At last he scarcely seems to see her, as he walks up and down the room in earnest thought, his brow contracted, his air gloomy.

Elizabeth observes and understands. Her power is sinking in the balance; everything must sink under such an overwhelming evidence of family weakness. “And never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him as now, when all love must be vain.”

At last Darcy recollects himself, and with a voice which indicates compassion, but also restraint, excuses himself for intruding on her and staying so long. He would fain have helped her, but he will not torment her with vain wishes. He fears the unfortunate affair will prevent his sister’s having the pleasure of seeing her at Pemberley that day.

Elizabeth hastily acquiesces, begs him to apologise to Miss Darcy, and adds a miserable entreaty that he will conceal the unhappy truth as long as possible—she knows it cannot be long.

He readily assures her of his secrecy, again expresses his sorrow for her distress, wishes it a happier ending than seems probable, leaves his compliments for her relations, and with only one serious parting look, goes.

As Darcy quits the room, Elizabeth feels how improbable it is that they two will ever see each other again on the happy terms which have marked their meetings in Derbyshire. But though the consideration is full of pain, the loyal girl has no time to spare for her own loss, in the calamity[16] which has befallen her family.

The Gardiners, returning, are ready with the utmost sympathy and regret. They promise every assistance in their power, including the immediate escort of Elizabeth[Pg 103] to Longbourn, after which Mr. Gardiner will join Mr. Bennet in London.

“But what is to be done about Pemberley?” exclaims Mrs. Gardiner. “John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for us. Was it so?”

“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement; that is all settled,” cries Elizabeth, hurrying out of the room in a fever to set off.

“What, is all settled?” repeats the other; “and are they on such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? If I only knew how it is!”

IV.
In as short a time as fresh horses can convey them, the party are at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner repairs to London, and induces Mr. Bennet, whose researches have been fruitless, to return home.

At last, after a period of wretched suspense, the news reaches Longbourn from Mr. Gardiner that he has discovered the couple. For Lydia’s sake, little as she has deserved it, they are married from Mr. Gardiner’s house. Certain stipulations have been made on Wickham’s part, that the bride shall in time inherit her share of her mother’s few thousand pounds; that her father shall allow Mrs. Wickham a hundred a year during his lifetime; that Wickham’s debts shall be paid, and a commission procured for him in “the regulars.” Withal, little real happiness could be expected from such a marriage. Wickham has only turned to Lydia when he was repulsed in other quarters. His debts have been the compelling cause of his flight from Brighton. Her fondness for him is made up of giddiness and a foolish passion on which she has put no restraint.

[Pg 104]

But Mrs. Bennet is as elated at having a daughter married at last, and married at sixteen, as if the marriage had come about in a more honourable way.

Mr. Bennet views the matter in a different light. He is satisfied that his brother-in-law has kept back the amount of money furnished by him to Wickham, which Mr. Bennet must somehow, sooner or later, repay.

Her father has told Kitty, in the driest of sore-hearted jesting, that no officer is to be allowed to enter his house again, or even to pass through the village. Balls are to be absolutely prohibited, unless she stands up with one of her sisters; and she is never to stir out of the house till she can prove that she has spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.

Kitty has received those threats in a serious light, and begins to cry.

“Well, well,” cries the incorrigible humourist, “don’t make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of them.”

At first, Mr. Bennet refuses to permit a visit from Mr. and Mrs. Wickham before he shall join his regiment in the North; but, on the earnest representations of his two elder daughters that to withhold the forgiving countenance of Lydia’s family from the young couple will be to lessen their slender chances of respectability, he allows the culprits to come for a short time to Longbourn, on their way to Newcastle.

The arrival of the Wickhams is in perfect keeping with what went before it, and is a splendid bit of serio-comedy. Jane blushes and Elizabeth blushes; but the cheeks of the two who cause their relations’ confusion suffer no increase of colour. Lydia is Lydia still, untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. Wickham is not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners have always been so pleasing that, had his audience not known his character, the smiling ease and grace with which he claims their relationship would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before[Pg 105] believed him quite equal to such assurance, but she resolves thenceforth to draw no limits to the impudence of an impudent man.

I hope I may be pardoned for drawing particular attention to the exquisite truthfulness of the couple’s behaviour. The correct definition of it is specially valuable at a time when slightly-altered versions of such conduct are classed differently, and passed off on inexperienced and thoughtless readers, to the grave detriment of their standards of good morals and good taste.

Lydia, in her total want of proper feeling and modesty, cries out, “Oh, mamma, do people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle to-day, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side glass next to him and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window-frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”

When the family party go in to dinner, Lydia, with eager parade, walks up to her mother’s right hand, saying triumphantly to her eldest sister, “Ah, Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman.”

After dinner the bride retires to show her ring, and boast of being married, to the housekeeper and maid-servants.

When the ladies are all together again in the breakfast-parlour, which a hundred years ago did duty as a drawing-room, unless on state occasions, Mrs. Wickham patronises her whole family by giving them a general invitation to Newcastle, where she hopes there will be balls, and she will take care to find good partners for her sisters. After her father and mother go away, one or two of the girls may be left behind, when their chaperon expresses a sanguine hope that she will get husbands for them before the winter is over.

“Thank you for my share of the favour,” says[Pg 106] Elizabeth, “but I do not particularly like your way of getting husbands.”

“Sour grapes! spiteful thing!” we can imagine Lydia saying, hardly below her breath. Do we not see her before us, as large as life, in all her native colours, the pert, hoidenish, vulgar-minded girl—as destitute of delicacy as of dutifulness, or sweet unselfishness, or gentle affection—who has become, by some strange, sad chance, a favourite in the literature of the day? I appeal to my readers—Is she not still the same, though the fashion of her dress, or the manner in which she wears her hair, and a few of her phrases, may be altered, and though—alas! for the lower tone of much modern English fiction—she is now held up to approbation instead of reprobation.

In the course of her shameless boasting about her marriage, Lydia lets out before her sisters that Mr. Darcy was present.

“Mr. Darcy!” exclaims Elizabeth, in utter bewilderment.

“Oh! yes, he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But, gracious me, I quite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully. What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret.”

“If it was to be such a secret,” says the honourable Jane, “say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no farther.”

“Oh! certainly,” says Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity, “we will ask you no questions.”

“Thank you,” answers Lydia coolly, “for if you did I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry.”

Elizabeth has to run away from the temptation. She has one resource, however; she can write and ask a private explanation from her kind aunt.

Elizabeth learns the whole truth, though Mrs. Gardiner does not conceal her surprise that the information is required in such a quarter. After Darcy’s[Pg 107] parting from Elizabeth in Derbyshire, he had gone immediately to London—and, in fact, done everything. It was he who, through his previous acquaintance with Wickham’s habits and associates, had discovered the couple, and brought them to Mr. Gardiner’s knowledge. It was Darcy who had conducted all the negotiations—in fine, it was Darcy who had insisted on paying the necessary money—a thousand pounds for Wickham’s debts; another thousand to be settled, in addition to her own, on Lydia; and the purchase-money for her husband’s commission. The reason which Darcy had urged for being allowed to take the lead in the matter, and to furnish the money, was that it had been through his own unjustifiable reserve, and want of consideration for others, that Wickham’s character had not been known, so that he had been received and noticed in respectable society.

But Mr. Gardiner would not have yielded up his right of making some sacrifice for his niece—or, rather, for her family—had he not been persuaded that Mr. Darcy of Pemberley had even a nearer interest in the affair, by being either actually engaged, or on the point of being engaged, to Lydia Bennet’s sister Elizabeth. Indeed, Mrs. Gardiner is still so convinced of the truth of the impression, and of the happy prospects of one of her favourite nieces, in a marriage with a man of much worth, as well as of great social consideration, who only wants a little more liveliness—which a judicious choice of a wife may supply—that, in closing her letter, she gaily begs Elizabeth not to punish the writer’s presumption by excluding her from Pemberley, since she can never be quite happy till she has been all round the park—an expedition for which a low phaeton, with a nice pair of ponies, would be the very thing.

Elizabeth is greatly moved by the efforts and the sacrifices of feeling—still more than of money—which Darcy has made on Lydia’s behalf. It could not have been for Lydia alone. But when Elizabeth asks herself, Were the Gardiners right in arguing it was for her—Elizabeth’s—sake?[Pg 108] she is met by the humbling reflection that the assistance he has rendered must, and ought to be, the last tribute paid by Darcy to a loyal, disinterested regard, which has proved in every way unfortunate. The idea of the proud, sensitive master of Pemberley voluntarily seeking to become the brother-in-law of Wickham, the son of his father’s steward—the man who has so wronged him and his, who has outraged Darcy’s every principle and instinct—the man whom of all others Darcy most abhors, and has reason to abhor—is not to be thought of for an instant. Yet Elizabeth is half-pleased, in the middle of her pain, to see how confidently her uncle and aunt have reckoned on her marriage with Darcy.

Mrs. Bennet is consoled for the Wickhams’ departure by the news, which quickly circulates in Meryton, that Mr. Bingley is coming down to Netherfield for the shooting. At once she resumes all her former projects for her eldest daughter, and poor Jane, in addition to the conflict in her own heart, has to submit to her mother’s pointedly looking at her, smiling at her, or shaking her head over her, every time the tenant of Netherfield’s name happens to be mentioned—which, for the present, is incessantly.

The old argument as to Mr. Bennett’s calling immediately at Netherfield is renewed.

Mr. Bennet stoutly refuses. “No, no; you forced me into visiting him last year, and promised me if I went to see him he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.”

In the middle of the doubts as to what brings Bingley back, and whether he comes with or without his friend’s gracious permission, Elizabeth thinks in her own merry way, “It is hard that this poor man cannot come to a house which he has legally hired without rousing all this speculation. I will leave him to himself.”

On the first morning after Bingley’s return into Hertfordshire, Mrs. Bennet has the joy of seeing him,[Pg 109] from her dressing-room window, riding up the paddock to Longbourn House. She calls her daughters to share her exultation. Jane sits still. Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, goes to the window; she looks, she sees Mr. Darcy with his friend, and sits down again by her sister.

“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” says the unconscious Kitty, and then adds the next moment, “La! it looks just like that man who used to be with him before, Mr. What’s-his-name? That tall, proud man.”

“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy; and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Mr. Bingley will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”

These are some of the many expressions of dislike to Darcy and misconception of his character, for which Elizabeth has partly herself to thank, since she had helped largely to originate them. She has now to listen to them in silence, while she alone is aware of the benefits he has conferred on the whole family, and that he has saved her mother’s favourite daughter from destruction.

Elizabeth had meant to watch closely Jane’s first interview with Bingley on his return; but the attention of the young watcher is sadly distracted by her own position and that of Darcy, while she has nearly as many doubts of Darcy’s intentions as of Bingley’s. Darcy’s coming there at all might have been supposed to have only one significance, but Elizabeth will not be sure.

As it happens, the double awkwardness of the situation is so great that all those most concerned in it labour under the greatest constraint—a constraint which, unhappily, is only too likely to be misconstrued.

Jane is pale and sedate.

Bingley is looking embarrassed as well as pleased.

Darcy strikes Elizabeth as more like what he used to be in Hertfordshire than as he had seemed in the pleasant days in Derbyshire.

[Pg 110]

Of Elizabeth’s own unwonted gravity, naturally she can have no just conception.

Matters are made worse by Mrs. Bennet, whose fulsome civility to Bingley, on the one hand, contrasted as it is with her cold politeness to Darcy, on the other, fill both her elder daughters with distress and mortification; though it is only Elizabeth who suffers agonies of shame from Mrs. Bennet’s most mal à propos dwelling on her youngest daughter’s marriage, and her hit at Darcy when she reflects, in reference to Wickham, “Thank Heaven! he has some friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he deserves.”

In the vehemence of youth, Elizabeth Bennet is persuaded that years of happiness—supposing they should ever come—could not make Jane and her amends for moments of such painful confusion. The first wish of her heart, Elizabeth declares to herself, is never more to be in the company of either of the gentlemen again. “Let me never see either one or the other again.”

Yet Jane Austen remarks with quiet fun, in the very next sentence, the misery for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation received material relief when Elizabeth was able to observe how speedily Bingley’s admiration for her sister was reviving in her presence. No doubt, also, Elizabeth derived some pleasure from the fact that both visitors engaged themselves to dine at Longbourn, on Mrs. Bennet’s eager invitation.

“Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine that day, but though she always kept a good table she did not think anything less than two courses[17] could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had £10,000 a year.”

After the visitors are gone, Elizabeth asks herself[Pg 111] again, “If he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent, why did he come at all?”

The dinner brings no satisfaction and enlightenment where Elizabeth’s private affairs are concerned. Bingley, no doubt, is renewing his attentions to Jane beyond the possibility of mistake, so that Mrs. Bennet may be almost excused for fully expecting him to come and propose next day; though the sensible and amiable Jane still nervously assures herself and her sister Elizabeth that any apparent partiality to her only proceeds from Bingley’s pleasing manners; and that, as for herself, she has become most desirably and comfortably indifferent with regard to his sentiments. But Darcy at the dinner-table is entirely separated from Elizabeth, and seated at the right hand of Mrs. Bennet, with whom he only exchanges an occasional formal word. In the drawing-room he does show an inclination to stand by Elizabeth, at the table where she and Jane are making tea and coffee, in the old, pretty, genial fashion; but the mere accident of the ladies of the party gathering about the table, and of a girl moving closer to Elizabeth with the stage whisper, “The men shan’t come and part us, I am determined; we want none of them, do we?” is sufficient to cause him to walk away. His tongue may have been tied, and yet his eyes might have spoken; but as far as Elizabeth could discern he looked as much and as earnestly at Jane as at herself, both on this occasion and on that of his call. It is all a tormenting puzzle.

V.
Bingley calls again without his friend, announcing that Darcy has gone to London, but will return to Netherfield in ten days. From this date Bingley’s wooing thrives apace. He makes daily engagements to shoot, or dine, or sup at Longbourn.

[Pg 112]

Mrs. Bennet practises the most transparent manœuvres to leave him alone with Jane, so that he may have the opportunity of saying “Barkis is willin’,” or some equivalent phrase, since Barkis had not yet made his model proposal. For a short space Jane and Elizabeth defeat these arrangements.

At last, one evening when Elizabeth has gone out of the room to write a letter, believing that all the others, including Bingley, are safely seated at cards, the indefatigable matchmaker contrives to dissolve the party, sends Mary to her piano, and carries away Kitty to sit with her mother in her dressing-room, while Mr. Bennet is, as usual, ensconced in his library. Elizabeth, returning to the drawing-room, where she expects to find the family, discovers that her mother has been too ingenious for her. On opening the door she perceives her sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation, and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turn and move away from each other, would have told all. There is a momentary awkwardness, till Bingley leaves the room to seek Mr. Bennet, when Jane is ready to proclaim herself the happiest girl in the world.

Elizabeth smiles at the rapidity and ease with which an affair that has cost them so much suspense and anxiety is finally settled. “And this,” she says to herself, “is the end of all his friend’s anxious circumspection, of all his sister’s falsehood and contrivance,—the happiest, wisest, most reasonable end.”

If Jane Bennet is the happiest girl, Mrs. Bennet is the happiest woman, according to her ideas of happiness. Lydia and Wickham are superseded; Jane is promoted, beyond comparison, her mother’s favourite child.

Meryton soon hears the tale, and after having, only a few weeks before, when Lydia ran away, pronounced the Bennet household marked out for misfortune, now declares them the luckiest family in the kingdom.

One morning, shortly after Jane’s engagement, a chaise and four drives up to Longbourn House. The[Pg 113] equipage and liveries are not familiar. The horses are “post.” It is too early for visitors.

Amidst the speculation thus aroused, Jane and Bingley retreat into the shrubbery, leaving Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and Kitty to receive the strangers, whoever they may be.

In a few minutes Lady Catherine de Bourgh is shown into the room. With the same arrogant ill-breeding which had distinguished the great lady’s behaviour at home, she now conducts herself in another person’s house, merely bowing to Elizabeth—the only member of the family with whom she has any previous acquaintance—sitting down, and in return for Mrs. Bennet’s fluttered attentions, putting her through a series of impertinent questions, and finding fault with the park and the sitting-room.

Elizabeth is at a loss to account for the unsolicited favour of her ladyship’s company, unless, indeed, she comes with a message from Mrs. Collins, but none is given.

At last Lady Catherine proposes that Elizabeth should take a turn with her in the wilderness, to which the girl accompanies her visitor, followed by an anxious direction from her mother to show her ladyship the different walks and the hermitage. As the couple go out, Lady Catherine opens the doors of the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and after a short survey, allows that they are “decent-looking rooms.”

The carriage stands at the door with Lady Catherine’s waiting-woman in it, announcing that Lady Catherine is on a journey taken with a set purpose.

Elizabeth leaves her companion, who is more than usually insolent and disagreeable, to begin the conversation, which she is not slow to do. “You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither: your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I come.”

Elizabeth professes her unaffected astonishment and entire ignorance.

[Pg 114]

“Miss Bennet,” says her ladyship angrily, “you ought to know that I am not to be trifled with.” Then, with a little preamble on the sincerity and frankness of her own character, she informs Elizabeth that a report of a most alarming nature had reached her two days before. “I was told,” says Lady Catherine, “that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that you—that Miss Elizabeth Bennet—would in all likelihood be soon afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy. Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”

Filled with resentment as Elizabeth is, she remains mistress of the situation. “If you believe it impossible to be true,” says the high-spirited, quick-witted girl, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by it?”

“At once to insist on having such a report universally contradicted.”

“Your coming to Longbourn to see me and my family,” says Elizabeth, with cool shrewdness, “will be rather a confirmation of it, if indeed, such a report is in existence.”

“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?”

But Elizabeth is a match for her absurd inquisitor. The girl is neither to be insulted nor browbeaten into giving Lady Catherine such satisfaction as she has not the smallest right to require, or into submitting to her tyranny.

In vain Lady Catherine presses her as to the report and its origin; Elizabeth will neither confess nor deny the implication.

“This is not to be borne!” exclaims her ladyship.[Pg 115] “Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”

“Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible,” replies Elizabeth, with demure imperturbability.

“It ought to be so,” her ladyship protests, hotly; but then—as she hints, broadly—Elizabeth’s arts and allurements may have made the young man, in a moment of infatuation, forget what is due to himself and his family. She may have drawn him in.

“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it,” Elizabeth answers.

Lady Catherine brings forward another imperative reason why such a proceeding can never take place: Mr. Darcy is engaged to her daughter.

“If he is so,” says the unshaken Elizabeth, “you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me.”

Lady Catherine is forced to hesitate, and to condescend to an explanation. The engagement is a family arrangement, based on perfect suitability of rank, fortune, and character. It had been planned by the two mothers, when the cousins were still children in their cradles. Can Elizabeth, a young woman of inferior birth, and of no importance in the world, be so lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy as to disregard the wishes of Mr. Darcy’s friends, and presume to alter the destiny which, from his earliest years, has united him with his cousin?

Yes; Elizabeth is intrepid enough to do it, and to tell the domineering woman that if there were no other objection to her—Elizabeth’s—marrying Lady Catherine’s nephew, she would certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt had wished him to marry Miss de Bourgh.

It is useless for Lady Catherine to threaten the penalties which the outraged family will inflict, ending in that direst indignity of all, that Elizabeth’s name will never be mentioned by any one of them; Elizabeth assures the speaker, almost airily, that though these[Pg 116] may be heavy misfortunes, the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness, that upon the whole she could have no cause to complain.

No wonder the incensed great lady is reduced to the somewhat undignified alternative of calling Elizabeth names—“obstinate, headstrong girl;” to telling her she is ashamed of her; to sitting down and crying—well-nigh piteously, waxing childish and maudlin, like many another baulked, irrational tyrant—that she will carry out her purpose; she has not been used to any person’s whims; she has not been in the habit of brooking disappointment; and it is not to be endured that her nephew and daughter are to be divided by the upstart pretensions of a young woman who, if she were sensible of her own good, would not wish to quit the sphere in which she had been brought up.

Elizabeth ventures to suggest that she is a gentleman’s daughter.

“True,” grants Lady Catherine; only to add, “but who was your mother? who are your uncles and aunts?”

“Whatever my connexions may be, if your nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to you,” says Elizabeth. She could not have been without a tingling recollection that he had objected to them pretty strongly, though she had just been marvelling how she could ever have imagined a resemblance between him and his aunt—the fact being that Lady Catherine presents a striking caricature of Darcy’s original defects, without any of his redeeming virtues.

“Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?” demands Lady Catherine.

Though Elizabeth has no cause to oblige Lady Catherine by giving a reply, her own candour and self-respect compel her to answer, “I am not.”

Lady Catherine shows herself pleased. “And will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?” She pursues her advantage with determination. “I will make no promises of the kind,” Elizabeth refuses[Pg 117] point-blank, and Lady Catherine’s short-lived satisfaction is dashed to the ground. She resumes her reproaches. She is shocked. At last she is guilty of the meanness and cruelty of taunting Elizabeth with her sister Lydia’s misconduct, ending by crying, “And is such a girl to be my nephew’s sister? Is her husband—the son of his father’s late steward—to be his brother? Heaven and earth, of what are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”

The extravagant theatrical declamation of her ladyship might have provoked a smile from Elizabeth, but she has already borne too much, and she winces under the last ungenerous stab. “You can have nothing further to say to me,” she exclaims, in her wounded feeling, with a simple dignity that contrasts well with the inflated pretensions of the other. “You have insulted me in every possible method; I must beg to return to the house.”

Lady Catherine is not to be taught a lesson: she has long outlived such a possibility. The thick skin of her arrogance and conceit is impenetrable. She assails Elizabeth with fresh abuse and importunity.

“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say,” Elizabeth contents herself with repeating. “You know my sentiments.”

Lady Catherine talks on till the carriage is reached, when she finishes her prolonged attack very characteristically. “I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet; I send no compliments to your mother; you deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased.”

The interview between Lady Catherine and Elizabeth, like the scene in which Mr. Collins proposes to the heroine, is a triumph of art. It is the perfection of true comedy, as opposed to the coarse farce which frequently stands for it, not only in its wonderful exhibition of Lady Catherine’s densely stupid egotism and self-importance, but in what is so successfully opposed to them in Elizabeth Bennet’s strong common sense, racy mother wit, and sterling truth to her lover and[Pg 118] to herself. Where a weak woman might have been cowed—at least, into a show of yielding for the time—or a foolishly sentimental girl might have been betrayed by the false glamour of unnecessary and uncalled-for self-sacrifice, Elizabeth stands firm, and comes out triumphantly. The whole passage, in its genius and wisdom, is a protest against the bathos of mock heroism, which is occasionally in danger of entrapping unwary actors in the drama of life. It is still more apt to mislead the artists who picture life, and mistake soft, even silly submission for unselfish resignation, and self-martyrdom for true martyrdom.

Elizabeth Bennet is dutiful in all the relations of life; she is even scrupulous as to its proprieties; but she is not a puppet in the hands of a Lady Catherine.

There is a curiously parallel scene drawn by one of Jane Austen’s favourite authors—Fanny Burney, in her novel of “Cecilia”—where the heroine is driven by nearly similar arguments—employed, however, by the mother, and not merely the aunt of the hero, who has also been a true friend, to whom Cecilia was deeply indebted—to give up the lover to whom she is doubly bound. In spite of these differences in the situation, which are in Fanny Burney’s favour, the opposite results of the two chapters go far to prove the immense superiority of Jane Austen as a writer.

Elizabeth has undergone the ordeal without blenching; but the reaction is to come. No doubt Lady Catherine will see her nephew in passing through London—how far may not her prejudiced version of what has passed between her and Elizabeth, with a vigorous personal appeal to Darcy, sway him as he still halts between two opinions? It is said that a woman who hesitates is lost—on the other side of the question; but the same saying does not hold good of a man. Lady Catherine is Darcy’s aunt; he must view her in another light from that in which Elizabeth regards her. It is natural to suppose she has some influence over him, while Elizabeth is only too well aware how much[Pg 119] weight he once put on some of his kinswoman’s violent objections.

Elizabeth makes up her mind that if Darcy does not return to Netherfield at the appointed date, she will know what to think.

In the meantime Elizabeth is summoned by her father to hear a letter from Mr. Collins read. In the tallest of tall language the writer solemnly congratulates the family on the brilliant prospects of his cousin Jane. Then, after referring to what is even the surpassing splendour of the alliance said to be within his cousin Elizabeth’s reach, Mr. Collins servilely and with nervous timidity states the unconquerable opposition of his revered patroness, and implores Elizabeth not to provoke Lady Catherine’s anger.

Mr. Bennet regards the report to which Mr. Collins has alluded, as the most preposterous mistake, and calls upon Elizabeth to laugh at it, as the best joke out. “Now, Lizzy, I think I have surprised you. Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life!”

Mr. Bennet is rather provoked because his daughter does not enjoy the absurdity of the idea as he had expected. “You are not going to be missish, I hope,” he says reproachfully, “and pretend to be affronted by an idle report.”

Poor Elizabeth! such incredulity is hard at this moment.

But Darcy returns punctually, and comes over to Longbourn with his friend; and in a walk undertaken by several of the young people, in which Elizabeth is Darcy’s companion, she musters courage to thank him as the only member of the family who knows how much they owe him for what he has done for her sister.

Darcy is surprised, but perhaps not sorry to have such an opening given to a shy man. “If you will thank me,” he says, “let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other inducements which led me on I shall not attempt[Pg 120] to deny; but your family owe me nothing, much as I respect them; I believe I thought only of you.”

Elizabeth is too embarrassed to say a word.

After a short pause her companion adds, “You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. My affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on the subject for ever.”

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forces herself to speak, and immediately, though not very fluently, gives him to understand that her sentiments have undergone so material a change since the period to which he has alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances.

The happiness which this reply produces is such as Darcy had probably never felt before, and he expresses himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love could be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him; but though she cannot look she can listen, and he speaks of feelings which, in proving of what importance she is to him, make his affection every moment more valuable.

Various happy explanations follow. Among others he tells her Lady Catherine did visit him and relate the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth, dwelling on every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship’s opinion, denoted Elizabeth’s perverseness and assurance. But, unfortunately for his noble aunt, the effect of the communication proved the reverse of what she had intended. “It taught me to hope,” he says, “as I had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of your disposition to be certain that had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine frankly and openly.”

Elizabeth colours and laughs as she replies, “Yes,[Pg 121] you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of that; after abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations.”

“What did you say to me that I did not deserve?” protests the ardent, magnanimous lover, and goes on to farther penitent and grateful confessions.

In reference to the engagement between Bingley and Jane, with which Darcy declares himself delighted, “I must ask whether you were surprised,” says Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went away I felt it would soon happen.”

“That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much.” Elizabeth rallies the speaker gaily.

Though he exclaims at the word, she finds that it had been pretty much the case.

On the evening before his last visit to London, Darcy had honestly told his friend of his own attachment and proposal to Elizabeth Bennet, which rendered his former interference between Bingley and Jane Bennet “simply impertinent.” The speaker had also courageously acknowledged that he believed from his observation of the latter he had been mistaken in his impression of Jane’s indifference.

“Your assurance,” says Elizabeth, with half-smothered fun, “I suppose carried immediate conviction to him?”

“It did,” replies Darcy, in perfect good faith. “Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case; but his reliance on mine made everything easy.”

Elizabeth longs to observe that Mr. Bingley has been a most delightful friend—so easily guided that his worth is invaluable; but she checks herself. She remembers that he has yet to learn to be laughed at, and it is rather too early to begin.

Here is one of Jane Austen’s characteristic touches.[Pg 122] Elizabeth, in the middle of her love and admiration for Darcy, sees, as such a woman could not fail to do, his weak points, and is not only tempted to laugh at him, but with a grand faith in his sense and love, and true to the character which had won his regard, she contemplates subjecting him in time to the wholesome discipline of her kindly laughter. And she lives to put her purpose into execution, for we are told Darcy’s young sister, in her delight in the sister he has given her, is forced to wonder at the liberties Elizabeth takes with her husband. For Georgiana Darcy had to learn that a wise man will bear and relish from his wife what would be out of place and unwelcome from the sister fifteen years his junior.

Surely any man worthy of his salt would prefer to be so dealt with by the woman who in her heart of hearts dearly loves and heartily honours and obeys him, rather than receive the mawkish and fulsome—even when it is free from deliberate falsehood—flattery and submission, not of a friend and mate, but of a toy and slave.

Elizabeth, in her happiness, has still to suffer for the violent, unreasonable prejudice, so freely expressed, which had marked the commencement of her intercourse with Darcy. She knows what she has to expect when even Jane, who, through Bingley, understands something of Darcy’s really fine nature, and who is besides prepossessed in his favour by what she imagines his hopeless passion for Elizabeth, yet meets her sister’s news with something like stony incredulity. “You are joking. This cannot be! Engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no; you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”

“This is a wretched beginning,” cries Elizabeth, lively in her very vexation. “My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me if you do not.”

“Oh! Lizzy, it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”

“You know nothing of the matter,” Elizabeth contradicts[Pg 123] her indignantly. “That is all to be forgotten. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now,” she submits to own, “but in such cases as these a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.”

“My dear, dear Lizzy, I would, I do congratulate you; but are you certain—forgive the question—are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?”

“There can be no doubt of that,” asserts the bride-elect, briskly. “It is settled between us already that we are to be the happiest couple in the world!”

Elizabeth has still to hear the ungracious epithets she herself had first applied bestowed liberally on her lover. So successful had she been in diffusing her ideas, that the faith in them—together with Darcy’s reserve—prevents even Mrs. Bennet, whose head is as full of lovers and future husbands as the feather-head of any extremely silly girl of sixteen, from viewing him in that light. “Good gracious!” she cries, as she stands at a window next morning, “if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley. What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but that he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley’s way.”

Elizabeth cannot help laughing at so convenient an arrangement; still she smarts at the prolonged echo of her own idle words.

It is still worse when Darcy has asked Mr. Bennet for Elizabeth’s hand, on the understanding that she herself has accepted him, and Elizabeth is bidden go to her father.

Mr. Bennet is walking up and down the library, looking grave and anxious. “Lizzy,” he says, “what are you doing? Are you out of your senses to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?”

How she wishes her former opinions had been more[Pg 124] reasonable, her expressions more moderate, that her pride and modesty might have been spared unsaying her own declarations on the one hand, and on the other making professions which are generally taken for granted. In some confusion she assures her father of her regard for Mr. Darcy.

“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have finer clothes and finer carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?”

“Have you any other objection than your belief in my indifference?” Elizabeth finds voice to say.

“None at all,” her father admits. “We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man, but that would be nothing if you really liked him.”

“I do, I do like him, I love him,” protests poor Elizabeth, with unwonted tears in her bright eyes, partly called forth by the trial of having to make such an awkward confession, partly provoked by the aspersions cast on Darcy, for which she was to blame in the first instance. “Indeed, he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.”

In spite of this warm defence, Mr. Bennet, with an honourable disinterestedness that does him credit as a man, and with no lack of fatherly tenderness—which even goes so far as to hint at the rock on which his own happiness has been wrecked—continues to remonstrate with his favourite daughter. No doubt he has given Darcy his consent, he says, with a flavour of his usual sardonic humour in his speech, for he is the kind of man to whom he should never dare refuse anything which he condescended to ask. Her father will give the same consent to Elizabeth if she is resolved on having it. But, changing his tone, he implores her to think better of the step she is about to take. She will be neither happy nor respectable unless she truly esteems her husband—unless she looks up to him as a superior. Her lively talents[Pg 125] will be a snare to her. “My child,” he ends with seriousness and feeling, “let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life.”

It is only after Elizabeth has entered into the fullest details of the progress of her love and Darcy’s, with the obstacles it has overcome, and after she has told all that Darcy did for Lydia, that Mr. Bennet is not merely reconciled to the match, but is duly impressed by the merits of his future son-in-law. “And so Darcy did everything, made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow’s debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle’s doing, I must and would have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you; and there will be an end of the matter.”

At last Mr. Bennet is in sufficient spirits to dismiss his daughter with the injunction, “If any young men come for Mary and Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Mrs. Bennet receives the announcement of her second daughter’s prospects in a very different fashion, for which Elizabeth is not responsible. Elizabeth takes care to tell the tale in the privacy of her mother’s dressing-room, after she has retired for the night. Here is the witty account of what followed. After remarking that the effect of Elizabeth’s communication was most extraordinary, the author enters into particulars:—

“Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable; nor was it until many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what was for the benefit of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself. “Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! who would have thought it? and is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy![Pg 126] how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money! what jewels! what carriages you will have! Jane’s is nothing to it—nothing at all! I am so pleased—so happy! Such a charming man! so handsome! so tall! Oh, my dear Lizzy, pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy! A house in town!—everything that is charming. Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! what will become of me? I shall go distracted!””

When Elizabeth escapes, she has not been in her own room three minutes before her mother comes after her. “My dearest child!” she cries, “I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! ’Tis as good as a lord! And a special licence! You must and shall be married by a special licence! But, my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow.”

Elizabeth dreads the next day, but after all, it goes off better than she has dared to expect; for, luckily, Mrs. Bennet stands in such awe of her intended son-in-law, that she does not venture to speak to him, unless it is in her power to offer him any attention, and mark her deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth turns for relief to write, like an affectionate young girl at the summit of human bliss, telling her Aunt Gardiner to suppose as much as she chooses, bidding her write again soon, and praise him (the one him for Elizabeth then) a great deal more than she has done in her last letter; thanking her for not going to the Lakes last summer; declaring the idea of the ponies is delightful. They will go round the park every day. She—Elizabeth—is the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so before, but none with such justice. She is happier, even, than Jane; she only smiles, Elizabeth laughs. Mr. Darcy sends Mrs. Gardiner all the love in the world that he can spare from the writer. They are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.

[Pg 127]

Was ever a young bride’s letter more full of frank, girlish joy; natural exultation, and glad look-out into the future?

Darcy writes to Lady Catherine, and acquaints her with the impending catastrophe, and she replies in such terms as for a time puts a stop to all intercourse between aunt and nephew.

Jane Austen begins her last chapter in her most sarcastic vein. “Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley and talked of Mrs. Darcy may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps, it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous, and invariably silly.”

The rest of the few remaining paragraphs are in a gentler strain, though they record that even Bingley’s easy temper and Jane’s affectionate heart discover a year’s residence in the immediate neighbourhood of Mrs. Bingley’s relations enough for them; though scrupulous mention is made of Miss Bingley’s paying all her arrears of civility to Elizabeth as Mrs. Darcy of Pemberley; and though a place is found for Lydia’s letter, wishing her sisters joy, and containing the impudent, mendacious request that, after they have become so rich, they will think of her and Wickham when they have nothing better to do. He would like a place at Court, and she does not think they have money enough to live on without some help.

The concluding paragraphs tell a little more which is pleasanter as far as human nature is concerned. Jane and Elizabeth’s darling wish is gratified by Bingley at last buying an estate in one of the counties next to[Pg 128] Derbyshire, so that the sisters dwell only thirty miles apart.

Mr. Bennet misses his second daughter so much that he is frequently found, a welcome guest, at Pemberley.

Mary and Kitty—especially the latter—derive lasting benefit from their elder sisters’ marriages, and the superior society opened up to them.

Elizabeth and Georgiana Darcy love each other, like true sisters.

By Elizabeth’s intercession Darcy is reconciled to his aunt, Lady Catherine, who consents to revisit Pemberley, in spite of the pollution which its woods have sustained, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but from the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city. For Darcy and Elizabeth show how true and lasting is their happiness by always testifying the most cordial esteem and gratitude to the friends who had been the means, by bringing her to Derbyshire, of uniting the couple.

Thus ends a novel which has for nearly a century been viewed, with reason, as one of the best novels in the English language, which has been the delight of some of the greatest geniuses of this and other countries. It must always remain a marvel that it was the work of a country-bred girl in her twenty-first year.

FOOTNOTES:
[13]Written in 1796-97.

[14]Besides Jane and Elizabeth Bennet, we have Ellinor and Marianne Dashwood, Anne and Lucy Steele, Henrietta and Louisa Musgrove, among the sisters who have most things in common; and as couples of unsympathetic and rival sisters there are Elizabeth and Anne Elliot, and Maria and Julia Bertram.

[15]When such gifts were strictly localised, the possession of them was better defined and more insisted upon. The “beauties” as well as the “fortunes” of a district were carefully classified and registered for the public good.

[16]Elopements were not uncommon among the highly-coloured events of those days, but the consequences were apt to be even more disastrous than they are to foolish young people of this generation.

[17]Would anything less than two courses be now reckoned “a good table” for a country gentleman’s family? Can we say the growing reckless luxury of these expensive times is well for ourselves and well for our fellow-citizens?

[Pg 129]

decorative image

NORTHANGER ABBEY.[18]
I.

ORTHANGER Abbey” begins in a quizzical vein, with a record of Catherine Morland’s disqualifications for her post of heroine, according to the popular acceptation of the term in Jane Austen’s days.

“No one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in her infancy would have supposed her born to be a heroine. Her situation in life, the character of her father and mother, her own person and disposition, were all equally against her. Her father was a clergyman, without being neglected or poor, and a very respectable man, though his name was Richard, and he had never been handsome. He had a considerable independence, besides two good livings, and he was not in the least addicted to locking up his daughters. Her mother was a woman of useful plain sense, with a good temper, and, what is more remarkable, with a good constitution. She had three sons before Catherine was born, and instead of dying in bringing the latter into the world, as anybody might expect, she still lived on—lived to have six children more, to see them growing up around her, and to enjoy excellent health herself. A family of ten children[Pg 130] will be always called a fine family, where there are heads, and legs, and arms enough for the number, but the Morlands had little other right to the word, for they were in general very plain, and Catherine, for many years of her life, as plain as any. She had a thin, awkward figure, a sallow skin, without colour, dark lank hair, and strong features; so much for her person; and not less unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind. She was fond of all boys’ plays, and greatly preferred cricket, not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic enjoyments of infancy, nursing a dormouse, feeding a canary-bird, and watering a rose-bush. Indeed, she had no taste for a garden, and if she gathered flowers at all it was chiefly for the pleasure of mischief, at least so it was conjectured, from her always preferring those which she was forbidden to take. Such were her propensities; her abilities were quite as extraordinary. She never could learn or understand anything before she was taught, and sometimes not even then, for she was often inattentive, and occasionally stupid. Her mother was three months in teaching her only to repeat ‘The Beggar’s Petition,’ and, after all, her next sister, Sally, could say it better than she could. Not that Catherine was always stupid; by no means; she learned the fable of ‘The Hare and Many Friends’ as quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished her to learn music, and Catherine was sure she should like it, for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the old forlorn spinet, so at eight years old she began. She learned a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland, who did not insist on her daughter’s being accomplished in spite of incapacity and distaste, allowed her to leave off. The day which dismissed the music-master was one of the happiest of Catherine’s life. Her taste for drawing was not superior, though whenever she could obtain the outside of a letter from her mother, or seize upon any other odd piece of paper, she did what she could in that way, by drawing houses and trees, hens and chickens, all very much like one another. Writing and accounts[Pg 131] she was taught by her father; French by her mother. Her proficiency in either was not remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both whenever she could. What a strange, unaccountable character! for with all these symptoms of profligacy at ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a bad temper, was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, with few interruptions of tyranny. She was, moreover, noisy and wild, hated confinement and cleanliness, and loved nothing so well in the world as rolling down the green slope at the back of the house.”

The story agrees with the first paragraph. With the exception of “Pride and Prejudice,” “Northanger Abbey”—another of Jane Austen’s earlier novels—is the most purely humorous and satirical of the whole.

At fifteen, appearances are mending with Catherine. She begins to curl her hair, and long for balls. Her complexion improves, her features are softened by plumpness and colour, her eyes gain more animation, her figure more consequence, and from fifteen to seventeen her mind is in training for a heroine. She reads—in addition to the stories which had formerly constituted all her voluntary reading—such books as Jane Austen tells us, in her merry mockery, heroines must read in order to supply their memories with those quotations which are so serviceable and so soothing in the vicissitudes of their eventful lives. Catherine studies Pope and Gray, Thomson and Shakespeare. Can Catherine’s sisters, in these days of much cramming and innumerable pursuits, bring forward even so respectable a list of authors with whom the young readers are intimately acquainted?

In drawing[19] Catherine is most wanting. Though she cannot write sonnets, she can read them; though there seems no chance of her throwing a whole party into raptures by a prelude on the piano, of her own[Pg 132] composition, she can listen to other people’s performances with very little fatigue. But she has not even sufficient command of the pencil to attempt a sketch of her lover’s profile, that she may be detected in the design. She is not so conscious of the deficiency in the meantime, since she has reached the age of seventeen without the suspicion of a lover. Her biographer accounts for the blank in that bantering tone she assumes:—“There was not one lord in the neighbourhood; no, not even a baronet. There was not one family among their acquaintance who had reared and supported a boy accidentally found at their door; not one young man whose origin was unknown. Her father had no ward, and the squire of the parish no children.”

But the perverseness of forty families cannot interfere with the destiny of a young lady who is to be a heroine: the wind will blow a hero to her.

Mr. Allen, the principal squire in Mr. Morland’s Wiltshire parish of Fullerton, is ordered to Bath for the benefit of a gouty constitution; and his wife, a good-humoured woman, fond of Miss Morland, and probably aware that, if adventures will not befall a young lady in her own village, she must seek them abroad, invites the happy Catherine to accompany her.

Catherine was in luck, for Bath was the queen of the old watering-places; and a popular English watering-place at the close of the last century was a centre of bustle and gaiety, just as a country village was apt to be sunk in obscurity.

Before beginning Catherine’s Bath career, Jane Austen suddenly lapses into seriousness for a moment, to tell her readers—lest they should ever have doubted it—that this young Catherine, going out into the world to meet her fortune, has an affectionate heart, her disposition is cheerful and open—without conceit or affectation of any kind, her manners are just removed from the awkwardness and shyness of a girl, her person is pleasing, and when in good looks pretty. Here the author’s not very lavish indulgence to her heroine collapses—“and[Pg 133] her mind,” the sentence ends, is “about as ignorant and uninformed as the female mind at seventeen usually is.”

How old was the judge who made this sweeping, though good-humouredly disdainful estimate of the mental acquirements of her companions? Just five or six years older. Jane Austen had not quite attained the venerable age of twenty-three when she uttered this severe reflection.

Compared to some of Jane Austen’s other heroines, Catherine Morland has none of the astuteness and brilliance of Elizabeth Bennet and Emma Woodhouse, the delicate intuitions of Fanny Price, or the gentle, womanly wisdom of Anne Elliot. Catherine is a simple, single-hearted girl who, in her guilelessness and ignorance of the world, falls into mistakes impossible for the others. But she does not lack judgment, which one feels will ripen with her years. Above all, she is like every one of her author’s heroines, right-minded and wholesome-hearted. At the same time she is a genuinely girlish girl, as much carried away by her feelings and her imagination as the most foolish of good girls can be; but withal we always recognise in her the possibilities of a sensible as well as an amiable woman.

The witty banter on the author’s part is soon resumed. At parting, Mrs. Morland, in place of solemnly warning her daughter against the noblemen and baronets who were in the habit of cozening away young ladies to remote farm-houses, simply bids her wrap herself warm about the throat when she comes from “the Rooms” at night, and try to keep an account of what money she spends.

Sally, or rather Sarah (for what young lady of common gentility will reach the age of sixteen without altering her name as far as she can?), the sister next Catherine in age, does not exact from her a promise to write by every post, and repeat each detail that happens to her.

[Pg 134]

Mr. Morland, instead of giving Catherine an unlimited order on his banker, or even putting a hundred pounds bank bill into her hands, gives her only ten guineas, and promises her more when she wants it.

Nay, the journey to Bath provides neither tempests nor robbers (see again the “Mysteries of Udolpho,” with which Jane Austen was so familiar, to which she refers with strong and repeated commendation in this very story, which is, however, in many passages, a burlesque on the old romance). No greater alarm occurs than a fear on Mrs. Allen’s side of having once left her clogs behind her at an inn, and that fortunately turns out to be groundless.

The mention of the clogs, and the inference of the nights at the inns by the way, a necessary experience of travellers who journeyed in their own carriages, or by post as Jane Austen herself was accustomed to do, are the sole things which remind us that the little party travelling thus in the last century do not belong to our neighbours to-day.

Farther removed from us is Bath when it was the height of the fashion, and frequented by crowds of pleasure-seekers in addition to health-seekers. Its gaiety was at once systematic and exuberant, when all the company gathered regularly in the Pump-room, where the visitors not only drank their allotted draughts of water, but walked about, sat, read, gossiped, or looked at the pretty knick-nacks in what formed a kind of bazaar. The evenings were still more social; with their assemblies, held within the early hours that permitted their nightly recurrence, their parties for tea and cards, in addition to dancing, their Master of the Ceremonies to play propriety. Bath brought together old friends and strangers from the ends of the earth, who would not otherwise have had a chance of meeting. It enabled quiet, home-keeping young people to see and enjoy, for a little, society and the great world. In its use and abuse it was the scene where innumerable love affairs had their origin and marriages were made up.[Pg 135] Its seasons had their stars, belles, and lions, like the London seasons.

A few foreign watering-places offer at present the nearest resemblance, but that in a very modified degree, to Bath in its palmy days.

Jane Austen knew Bath well, both by reading and personal experience, alike in her youth and in her mature years. She introduces it as the locality—largely or in part—of two of her novels, and has a pointed reference to it in a third.[20] The lady humourist indicates with a sharp pen, as she indicates most things, the advantages and disadvantages of the watering-places, which figured so prominently in the social life of the period. In “Northanger Abbey” the advantages rather prevail. If Bath brings Catherine some undesirable friends, it brings her also the indispensable hero—not forthcoming elsewhere.

Miss Austen had resided years in Bath, and it was common ground which had lost its illusions to her when, after she had quitted it, she brought it and its convenient round of visitors and gaieties into “Persuasion.”

I fancy I detect a different spirit in treating the subject in “Northanger Abbey.” Bath had still to the author something of the ineffable charm it must have had for Catherine Morland, in the glamour of first acquaintance, and of the introduction of a country clergyman’s young daughter into a brilliant and fascinating society—a society which was then great in courtly, gallant, distinguished figures—royal, naval, military, literary. Tunbridge had waned before Bath, which was the field of much picturesque and interesting display. Now it was a wandering prince or princess, who was to be mobbed and stared at by the well-dressed throng. Another evening, patriotic enthusiasm persecuted a brave soldier, who had served in Egypt under Abercrombie and[Pg 136] Moore, or a gallant sailor who had nailed his colours to the mast under Nelson or Collingwood; or it might be the crowd surged to and fro to enable honestly marvelling and admiring eyes to gaze on that wonderful genius, little Miss Burney, full of self-consciousness, as she tripped through the Rooms under the wing of the great brewer’s wife, beautiful, dashing Mrs. Thrale, in the centre of a cluster of learned men and petit-maîtres.

Mrs. Allen, Catherine Morland’s chaperon, is thoroughly commonplace—except in a passion for dress, if that can be called uncommon. She believes she has done her best for Catherine in preparing her for her introduction to society, when Mrs. Allen and her maid have seen that the girl’s hair is cut (in a crop!) and dressed by the most stylish hand, and her clothes put on with care. The next thing is to take her to one of the crowded assemblies, to struggle along and get squeezed, in the rush of strangers, to reach the top of the room, and see over the heads of the spectators—who always form a large preponderance of the company—the high feathers[21] of some of the privileged ladies who are dancing. Then the struggle begins again to reach one of the tea-rooms, and finally Mrs. Allen and Catherine leave, without speaking to anybody save Mr. Allen.

But though Mrs. Allen is content to be fine, and to look at other fine people, Catherine’s wishes naturally extend a little further—to no purpose, for her companion is indolent, and does nothing more than serenely regret that they know nobody, and that the Skinners who were at Bath last year are not there again. Catherine, though by no means an unreasonable girl, feels slightly disappointed and tired of the irksomeness of an imprisonment in a crush of men and women, in full dress, with faces[Pg 137] unknown to her, furnishing no deliverer. Her first ball—that eagerly looked-forward-to era—threatens her with the shock and mortification of proving a good deal of a failure.

At last, when the rooms are beginning to thin and patient sitters can be better seen, though nobody starts with rapturous wonder on beholding Catherine, no whisper of eager inquiry runs round the room, nor is she once called a divinity by anybody, Catherine overhears two gentlemen speak of her as “a pretty girl.”

“Such words had their due effect. She immediately thought the evening pleasanter than she had found it before; her humble vanity was contented; she felt more obliged to the two young men for this simple praise than a true quality heroine would have been for fifteen sonnets in celebration of her charms, and went to her chair in good humour with everybody, and perfectly satisfied with her share of public attention.”

Fresh-hearted, girlish, young Catherine! with her innocent satisfaction in the bare information that she possesses her moderate share of God’s gift of womanly beauty. One can fancy her little feet, in their clocked stockings and shoes with buckles, tapping out on the floor of the ancient sedan-chair, in which she is borne home from her modest revelry, that dance of which she has been defrauded.

But was it not like Jane Austen to leave her heroine without a partner at her first ball? After all, may not the temporary eclipse befall a girl without any fault of hers, or of others, and cannot the example of Catherine Morland teach her fellow-sufferers good-humoured resignation? It is the arrogant, ungenerous employment of such petty terms of slighting reproach as “wallflowers,” with the exaggeration of their influence by sensitive, inexperienced girls, which often renders harmless, youthful gaieties fertile in miserable mean jealousies, despicable, ill-bred triumphs, and endless heart-burnings.

After the usual routine of shopping and sightseeing, in addition to the Pump-room, after the Allens had[Pg 138] visited the Lower as well as the Upper Rooms with which Bath was supplied, Catherine has at last the satisfaction of finding the Master of the Ceremonies leading up to her, according to the etiquette of his office, a gentlemanlike young man named Tilney, who has desired to be presented to her, in order to ask her to be his partner in a country dance.

Catherine’s partner, whom she regards with a flush of flattered pleasure, because he has flattered her by his selection of her—an absolute stranger in the crowded assembly, is about four or five and twenty, rather tall, and has one of those pleasing countenances to which Jane Austen always gave a marked and deserved preference over mere regularity of feature or glow of colouring. As to an interesting haggardness, a charming suspicion of wickedness, she, with all other good women in their senses, could not see either interest or charm in them.

Mr. Tilney possesses another advantage which was also in special favour with the author—a very intelligent, lively eye. The languidly supercilious and stupid “swells” of the nineteenth century would have been odious to the brilliant novelist of the eighteenth, even though she could have seen them endowed with tawny beards, Greek profiles, and that comically dubious attribute, a sleepy blue eye. The reputation of these fine gentlemen as lady-killers of the first water would have struck her in the light of an unmitigated disgrace, and not a crowning honour. The flavour of vice which seems to have so irresistible an attraction for many writers and readers would have been utterly repugnant to her, as to all pure-minded, high-souled men and women.

Henry Tilney begins his acquaintance with Catherine Morland, by making kindly fun to her and of her, with great impartiality.

Catherine, sometimes seeing through his assumptions, sometimes thoroughly taken in by them, is equally pleased, in sheer willingness to be pleased.

[Pg 139]

Henry Tilney mimics successfully the stereotyped conversation of newly-introduced partners at the Rooms. For his own amusement and Catherine’s he describes the different lights in which he may figure in her journal—“‘Friday—Went to the Lower Rooms; wore my sprigged muslin robe with blue trimmings, plain black shoes; appeared to much advantage; but was strangely harassed by a queer half-witted man, who would make me dance with him, and distressed me by his nonsense;’ or, ‘I danced with a very agreeable young man, introduced by Mr. King; had a great deal of conversation with him; seems a most extraordinary genius; hope I may know more of him.’ That, madam, is what I wish you to say.”

He hoaxes her on the easy style of letter-writing for which ladies are so generally celebrated.

“I have sometimes thought,” says Catherine, naïvely, “whether ladies do write so much better letters than gentlemen.”

Mr. Tilney declares letter-writing among women is faultless, save in three particulars—a general deficiency of subject, a total inattention to stops, and a very frequent ignorance of grammar.

We fear that ladies’ letters still come largely under Mr. Tilney’s definition.

The young fellow even chaffs Mrs. Allen, when she appears to beg Catherine to take a pin out of her sleeve. She fears a hole has been torn in the gown, which is a favourite, though it cost but nine shillings a yard.

“That is exactly what I should have guessed it, madam,” said Mr. Tilney, looking at the muslin.

“Do you understand muslins, sir?”

“Particularly well: I always buy my own cravats, and am allowed to be an excellent judge; and my sister has often trusted me in the choice of a gown. I bought one for her the other day, and it was pronounced to be a prodigious bargain by every lady who saw it. I gave but five shillings a yard for it, and a true Indian muslin.”

[Pg 140]

Mrs. Allen was quite struck by his genius. “Men commonly take so little notice of those things,” said she. “I can never get Mr. Allen to know one of my gowns from another. You must be a great comfort to your sister, sir.”

“I hope I am, madam.”

“And pray, sir, what do you think of Miss Morland’s gown?”

“It is very pretty, madam,” said he, gravely examining it; “but I do not think it will wash well. I am afraid it will fray.”

“How can you,” said Catherine, laughing, “be so——” she had almost said “strange?”

“I am quite of your opinion, sir,” replied Mrs. Allen, “and so I told Miss Morland when she bought it.”

“But then you know, madam, muslin always turns to some account or other; Miss Morland will get enough out of it for a handkerchief, or a cap, or a cloak. Muslin can never be said to be wasted. I have heard my sister say so forty times, when she has been extravagant in buying more than she wanted, or careless in cutting it to pieces.”[22]

A few inquiries satisfy Mr. Allen that young Tilney is a clergyman belonging to a very respectable family in Gloucestershire.

Catherine having found a partner, is next to secure a young lady friend. Mrs. Allen stumbles unexpectedly in the Pump-room on an old acquaintance of early days in a Mrs. Thorpe, the mother of several sons and daughters.

Isabella Thorpe, the eldest daughter, on being introduced to Catherine, surprises her by exclaiming on her resemblance to her brother, and Catherine recollects that her eldest brother had spent the last week of his college vacation with the family of a member of his college, named Thorpe.

[Pg 141]

Miss Thorpe is a beautiful girl, four years older than Catherine, and more than four years better informed in knowledge of the world. She has no objection to bestow her superior knowledge—in discovering a flirtation between any gentleman and lady who only smile on each other, and pointing out a quiz[23]—on her companion. As for Catherine, she might have been a little afraid of such undreamt-of powers of observation, had it not been for what she readily accepted as the easy gaiety of Miss Thorpe’s manner, and for the gratitude inspired by the circumstance that her new friend was profuse in her expressions of delight over their acquaintance.

The reproach of being “gushing,” with the affectation of being destitute of natural affection, good principles, good feelings, and good manners, did not exist last century. But my readers will observe that, while Isabella Thorpe gushes to excess, Catherine, simple and natural, is in a great measure free from the offence.

Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Thorpe renew their old intimacy, and Isabella and Catherine rush into a bosom friendship. “They called each other by their Christian names, were always arm-in-arm when they walked, pinned up each other’s train for the dance, and were not to be divided in the set; and if a rainy morning deprived them of other enjoyments, they were still resolute in meeting in defiance of wet and dirt, and shut themselves up to read novels together.”

Jane Austen takes this opportunity of writing a spirited defence of her art. “Yes, novels,” she repeats, “for I will not adopt the ungenerous and impolitic custom so common with novel-writers[24] of degrading by[Pg 142] their contemptuous censure the very performances to the number of which they are themselves adding; joining with their greatest enemies in bestowing the harshest epithets on such works, and scarcely ever permitting them to be read by their own heroine, who, if she accidentally take up a novel, is sure to turn over its insipid pages with disgust. Alas! if the heroine of one novel be not patronised by the heroine of another, from whom can she expect protection and regard? I cannot approve of it. Let us leave it to the reviewers to abuse such effusions of fancy at their leisure, and over every new novel to talk in threadbare strains of the trash with which the press now groans. Let us not desert one another; we are an injured body. Although our productions have afforded more extensive and unaffected pleasure than those of any other literary corporation in the world, no species of composition has been so much decried. From pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foes are almost as many as our readers; and while the abilities of the nine-hundredth abridger of the History of England, or of the man who collects and publishes in a volume some dozen lines of Milton, Pope, and Prior, with a paper from the ‘Spectator,’ and a chapter from Sterne, are eulogised by a thousand pens, there seems almost a general wish of decrying the capacity and undervaluing the labours of the novelist, and of slighting the performances which have only genius, wit and taste to recommend them. ‘I am no novel reader;’ ‘I seldom look into novels;’ ‘Do not imagine that I often read novels;’ ‘It is really very well for a novel;’—such is the common cant. ‘And what are you reading, Miss ——?’ ‘Oh, it is only a novel!’ replies the young lady; while she lays down her book with affected indifference or momentary shame. It is only ‘Cecilia,’ or ‘Camilla,’ or ‘Belinda,’ or, in short, only some work in which the greatest powers of the mind are displayed, in which the most thorough knowledge of human nature, the happiest delineation of its varieties, the liveliest effusions of wit and humour, are conveyed to the world[Pg 143] in the best-chosen language.[25] Now had the same young lady been engaged with a volume of ‘The Spectator’ instead of such a work, how proudly would she have produced the book and told its name!”

It would be strange indeed if a young lady were now discovered reading a volume of “The Spectator.” One might as soon expect to see a modern maiden seated at a spinning-wheel, or twirling a distaff and spindle.

But what an analysis of schoolgirl friendships, occupations, and interests survives in the sixth chapter of “Northanger Abbey!” The following conversation is an example of the attachment of the friends after an acquaintance of eight or nine days, and of the “delicacy, discretion, originality of thought, and literary taste which marked the reasonableness of that attachment:”—

“They met by appointment, and as Isabella had arrived nearly five minutes before her friend, her first address naturally was, ‘My dearest creature, what can have made you so late? I have been waiting for you at least this age!’

“‘Have you, indeed? I am very sorry for it, but really I thought I was in very good time. It is but just one. I hope you have not been here long?’

“‘Oh, these ten ages, at least. I am sure I have been here this half-hour. But now let us go and sit down at the other end of the room and enjoy ourselves. I have a hundred things to say to you. In the first place, I was so afraid it would rain this morning, just as I wanted to set off: it looked very showery, and that would have thrown me into agonies! Do you know, I saw the prettiest hat you can imagine in a shop-window in Milsom Street, just now: very like yours, only with coquelicot ribbons instead of green; I quite longed for it. But, my dearest Catherine, what have you been doing with yourself, all this morning? Have you gone on with “Udolpho?”’

[Pg 144]

“‘Yes; I have been reading it ever since I woke; and I am got to the black veil.’

“‘Are you, indeed? How delightful! Oh, I would not tell you what is behind the black veil for the world! Are you not wild to know?’

“‘Oh, yes, quite; what can it be? But do not tell me; I would not be told, on any account. I know it must be a skeleton. I am sure it is Laurentina’s skeleton! Oh, I am delighted with the book! I should like to spend my whole life in reading it, I assure you. If it had not been to meet you, I would not have come away from it for all the world.’

“‘Dear creature! how much I am obliged to you! And when you have finished “Udolpho,” we will read “The Italian” together; and I have made out a list of ten or twelve more of the same kind for you.’

“‘Have you, indeed? How glad I am! What are they all?’

“‘I will read you their names directly; here they are, in my pocket-book—“Castle of Wolfenbach,” “Clermont,” “Mysterious Warnings,” “Necromancer of the Black Forest,” “Midnight Bell,” “Orphan of the Rhine,” and “Horrid Mysteries.” Those will last us some time.’

“‘Yes, pretty well; but are they all horrid? Are you sure they are all horrid?’[26]

“‘Yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine, a Miss Andrews, a sweet girl, one of the sweetest creatures in the world, has read every one of them. I wish you knew Miss Andrews, you would be delighted with her. She is netting herself the sweetest cloak you can conceive. I think her as beautiful as an angel; and I am so vexed with the men for not admiring her. I scold them all amazingly about it.’

“‘My dearest Catherine, have you settled what to[Pg 145] wear on your head to-night?’ asked Isabella Thorpe, a few minutes afterwards. ‘I am determined, at all events, to be dressed exactly like you. The men take notice of that sometimes, you know.’

“‘But it does not signify if they do,’ said Catherine, very innocently.

“‘Signify! Oh, Heavens! I make it a rule never to mind what they say. They are often amazingly impertinent if you do not treat them with spirit, and make them keep their distance.’

“‘Are they? Well, I never observed that. They always behave very well to me.’

“‘Oh, they give themselves such airs. They are the most conceited creatures in the world, and think themselves of so much importance! By-the-bye, though I have thought of it a hundred times, I have always forgot to ask you what is your favourite complexion in a man. Do you like them best dark or fair?’

“‘I hardly know. I never much thought about it. Something between both, I think;—brown: not fair, and not very dark.’

“‘Very well, Catherine; that is exactly he. I have not forgot your description of Mr. Tilney—“a brown skin, with dark eyes and rather dark hair.” Well, my taste is different: I prefer light eyes; and as to complexion, do you know I like a sallow better than any other. You must not betray me, if you should ever meet with any one of your acquaintance answering that description.’

“‘Betray you! What do you mean?’

“‘Nay, do not distress me. I believe I have said too much. Let us drop the subject.’

“Catherine, in some amazement, complied; and after remaining a few moments silent, was on the point of reverting to what interested her, at that time, rather more than anything else in the world—Laurentina’s skeleton—when her friend prevented her, by saying, ‘For Heaven’s sake! let us move away from this end of the room. Do you know there are two odious young[Pg 146] men who have been staring at me this half-hour. They really put me quite out of countenance. Let us go and look at the arrivals. They will hardly follow us there.’

“Away they walked to the book; and while Isabella examined the names, it was Catherine’s employment to watch the proceedings of these alarming young men.

“‘They are not coming this way, are they? I hope they are not so impertinent as to follow us. Pray let me know if they are coming: I am determined I will not look up.’

“In a few moments, Catherine, with unaffected pleasure, assured her that she need not be longer uneasy, as the gentlemen had just left the Pump-room.

“‘And which way are they gone?’ said Isabella, turning hastily round. ‘One was a very good-looking young man.’

“‘They went towards the churchyard.’

“‘Well, I am amazingly glad I have got rid of them; and now what say you to going to Edgar’s Buildings with me, and looking at my new hat? You said you should like to see it.’

“Catherine readily agreed. ‘Only,’ she added, ‘perhaps we may overtake the two young men.’

“‘Oh, never mind that. If we make haste, we shall pass by them presently, and I am dying to show you my hat.’

“‘But if we only wait a few minutes, there will be no danger of our seeing them at all.’

“‘I shall not pay them any such compliment, I assure you. I have no notion of treating men with such respect. That is the way to spoil them.’

“Catherine had nothing to oppose against such reasoning, and therefore, to show the independence of Miss Thorpe, and her resolution of humbling the sex, they set off immediately, as fast as they could walk, in pursuit of the two young men.”

[Pg 147]

II.
As the girls are crossing a street, they are stopped by the approach of a gig, driven along on bad pavement, by a most knowing-looking coachman, with all the vehemence that could most fully endanger the lives of himself, his companion, and his horse.

“Oh! these odious gigs,” cries Isabella, “how I detest them!”

But the detestation—though so just, is of short duration, for she looks again and exclaims, “Delightful! Mr. Morland and my brother!”

James Morland, a steady, amiable young man, had fallen a victim to Isabella’s charms. Two results which had followed his subjection were his own forced alliance with Isabella’s brother, John, and Isabella’s violent friendship with James’s sister, Catherine.

James and Catherine Morland, an affectionate brother and sister, are very happy to meet each other—quite unexpectedly on Catherine’s part. But little leisure is left for fraternal greetings, since the bright eyes of Miss Thorpe are incessantly challenging Mr. Morland’s notice.

John Thorpe, who has only slightly and carelessly touched his sister’s hand, is sufficiently impressed by Catherine to grant her a whole scrape, and half a short bow.

John Thorpe is one of Jane Austen’s finished and unsurpassable portraits. He is the “buck” of the period, the slangy, horsey, blustering, bragging young fellow of all time.

“He was a stout young man of middling height, who, with a plain face and ungraceful form, seemed fearful of being too handsome unless he wore the dress of a groom, and too much like a gentleman unless he were easy where he ought to be civil, and impudent where he might be allowed to be easy.”

I am not able to afford space for much of his highly characteristic talk, but here is a specimen. “He took out[Pg 148] his watch. ‘How long do you think we have been running it from Tetbury, Miss Morland?’

“‘I do not know the distance.’

“Her brother told her that it was twenty-three miles.

“‘Three-and-twenty!’ cried Thorpe; ‘five-and-twenty, if it is an inch.’

“Morland remonstrated, pleaded the authority of road-books, inn-keepers and mile-stones; but his friend disregarded them all; he had a sure test of distance. ‘I know it must be five-and-twenty,’ said he, ‘by the time we have been doing it. It is now half after one; we drove out of the inn-yard at Tetbury as the town-clock struck eleven; and I defy any man in England to make my horse go less than ten miles an hour in harness; that makes it exactly twenty-five.’

“‘You have lost an hour,’ said Morland; ‘it was only ten o’clock when we came from Tetbury.’

“‘Ten o’clock! it was eleven, upon my soul! I counted every stroke. This brother of yours would persuade me out of my senses, Miss Morland; do but look at my horse, did you ever see an animal so made for speed in your life?’

“Catherine remarked the horse did look very hot.

“‘Hot! he had not turned a hair till we came to Walcot Church; but look at his forehead; look at his loins; only see how he moves; that horse cannot go less than ten miles an hour; tie his legs, and he will get on. What do you think of my gig, Miss Morland? A neat one, is it not? Well hung; town-built;’” and so on, ringing endless changes on John Thorpe’s possessions, their super-excellence, and his cleverness in securing them.

John Thorpe pronounces his criticism on the novels of the day, in a slashing, manly style, which still survives here and there. Poor Catherine, tired of his bets, and his short, sharp praise or condemnation of every woman’s face they pass, ventures to introduce the subject uppermost in her thoughts, “Have you ever read ‘Udolpho,’ Mr. Thorpe?”

[Pg 149]

“‘Udolpho!’ Oh! Lord! not I; I never read novels; I have something else to do.”

Catherine, humbled and ashamed, was going to apologise for her question; but he prevented her.

“Novels are all so full of stuff and nonsense,” he said, with more to the same purpose, winding up by the assertion of novels in general that “they are the stupidest things in creation.”

“I think you must like ‘Udolpho,’ if you were to read it,” Catherine pleads wistfully for her favourite, “it is so very interesting.”

“Not I, faith! No, if I read any, it shall be Mrs. Radcliffe’s; her novels are amusing enough; they are worth reading; some fun and nature in them.”

“‘Udolpho’ was written by Mrs. Radcliffe,” said Catherine, with some hesitation, from the fear of mortifying him.

“No, sure; was it? Ay, I remember; so it was. I was thinking of that other stupid book, written by that woman they made such a fuss about; she who married the French emigrant.”

John Thorpe’s manners do not please Catherine, inexperienced though she is; but he is James’s friend, and Isabella’s brother. Besides, Catherine is told by Isabella that John finds her the most charming girl in the world, and John himself engages her for one of the dances at the evening’s assembly. Jane Austen points out—and here she has a gentle explanation of a girlish weakness—that, had Catherine been older and vainer, such attacks might have done little; but where youth and diffidence are united, it requires uncommon steadiness of reason to resist the attraction of being called the most charming girl in the world, and of being so very early engaged as a partner.

The young Morlands and Thorpes, with the good-natured concurrence of Mr. and Mrs. Allen, form many morning and evening engagements together. In the course of these engagements, Catherine likes John Thorpe less and less, in spite of his boisterous professions[Pg 150] of admiration. She even begins to have painful doubts of the perfect amiability and good taste of her bosom friend and future sister—a prospective relationship which Catherine hailed with delight in the beginning.

Indeed, Isabella behaves with all the rampant selfishness, reckless disregard of appearances, and insatiable appetite for admiration with which a vain, coarse-minded, heartless Isabella Thorpe can behave. Her loud, insincere professions, which her practice contradicts so glaringly, could not have deceived Catherine even so long as they did, had it not been that the younger girl, brought up in the worthy clergyman’s upright, kind-hearted household, is unsuspicious of evil, and guileless as a dove.

In broad contrast to the two wilful, wild Thorpes, are Henry Tilney and his sister, a sensible, good, pretty, and well-bred girl, who is young and attractive, and can enjoy herself at a ball, without wanting to fix the attention of every man near her, and without exaggerated feelings of ecstatic delight or inconceivable vexation on every little trifling occurrence.

In these blasé, nil admirari days, when many young people find nothing worth the trouble of being excited about, when enthusiasm is dead, and even moderate interest seems fast expiring, it may be thought that such warnings as are conveyed in the praise of Eleanor Tilney are not required. But I suspect it is a case of scratch the Russian, and you will find the Tartar. It is the fashion to appear indifferent and cynical, and so our very children—held up to us in the mirror of “Punch”—babble weariness with the world, and misanthropy. But the languor and scorn—happily for humanity—form a mere accidental crust, beneath which, more or less visible, are the old ardour and impetuosity, which need to be tutored to temperance and prudence, and charged never to forget their Christian baptism of generous self-forgetfulness and chivalrous magnanimity, in a peaceful drawing-room as well as on a stricken battle-field.

[Pg 151]

The Tilneys, to whom Catherine is so strongly attracted, though perfectly civil in any encounter with the Thorpes, instinctively recoil from them. The different qualities of the young people, no less than the different sets in which they move, prevent amalgamation.

Many capital scenes in “Northanger Abbey” exhibit young Catherine Morland’s puzzled distress at the clashing social elements among which she finds herself, with her own decided preference for the Tilneys, opposed to what she conceives is her allegiance, alike of friendship and sisterly fidelity, to the Thorpes.

The best and most comical of the sketches are those in which Catherine is twice entrapped into driving with John Thorpe in the watering-place fashion of the time, making one of a party which is completed by James Morland and Isabella Thorpe in another open carriage.

“‘You will not be frightened, Miss Morland,’ said Thorpe as he handed her in, ‘if my horse should dance about a little at first setting off. He will most likely give a plunge or two, and perhaps take the reins for a minute; but he will soon know his master. He is full of spirits, playful as can be, but there is no vice in him.’

“Catherine did not think the portrait a very inviting one, but it was too late to retreat, and she was too young to own herself frightened; so resigning herself to her fate, and trusting to the animal’s boasted knowledge of its owner, she sat peaceably down and saw Thorpe sit down by her. Everything being then arranged, the servant who stood at the horse’s head was bid, in an important voice, ‘to let him go,’ and off they went in the quietest manner imaginable, without a plunge or a caper, or anything like one.

“Catherine, delighted at so happy an escape, spoke her pleasure aloud with grateful surprise; and her companion immediately made the matter perfectly simple by assuring her that it was entirely owing to the peculiarly judicious manner in which he had then held the reins and the singular discernment and dexterity with which he had directed his whip.

[Pg 152]

“‘Old Allen is as rich as a Jew, is not he?’ said Thorpe, breaking a silence. Catherine did not understand him, and he repeated his question, adding in explanation, ‘Old Allen, the man you are with?’

“‘Oh, Mr. Allen you mean. Yes. I believe he is very rich.’

“‘And no children at all?’

“‘No, not any.’

“‘A famous thing for his next heirs. He is your godfather, is not he?’

“‘My godfather! No.’

“‘But you are always very much with them?’

“‘Yes, very much.’

“‘Ay, that is what I meant. He seems a good kind of old fellow enough, and has lived very well in his time, I dare say; he is not gouty for nothing. Does he drink his bottle a day now?’

“‘His bottle a day! No. Why should you think such a thing? He is a very temperate man, and you could not fancy him in liquor last night?’

“‘Lord help you! You women are always thinking of men’s being in liquor. Why, you do not suppose a man is overset by a bottle?’”

Modest as Catherine is in her unsophisticatedness, she betrays unconsciously her admiration of Henry Tilney, both to the gentleman and his sister. Fortunately, Catherine has fallen into good hands. Eleanor Tilney only likes her friend the better for liking her brother. With regard to the effect on the hero, of the girl’s tribute to his merits, Jane Austen has made a few pungent observations.

It may be that the world has grown a little wiser as well as older during the last hundred years. Certainly sensible, good young girls—however young and simple—have learnt, for the most part, to put more outward restraint, we would fain hope, in the course of some improvement on their education, on their inner sentiments. Girls have acquired a degree of the subtlety of the serpent in addition to the artlessness of the dove.

[Pg 153]

The Catherine Morland of the past is always frank, sweet, and dutiful. We can never, we are thankful, doubt her reverence and uprightness. We need never fear scandalous defiance of the laws of God and man from her. But drawn as she is, by the masterly pen of Jane Austen, Catherine is often exasperatingly foolish, and especially so in falling deeply in love, on the very slightest provocation, so far as any symptom of reciprocity of feeling on Henry Tilney’s side is made plain to the readers of “Northanger Abbey.”

Indeed, Jane Austen expressly states, with her usual dauntless candour, that the love begins on Catherine’s side, and that the agreeable—let us hope grateful—sense of the regard he has unwittingly inspired, is the spark which kindles a responsive flame in the young man’s breast.

But what would have become of Catherine had Henry Tilney been—not pre-engaged, we do not suspect him of unworthy concealment in such circumstances; of course he would have smiled the smile, bowed the bow, and danced the dance of a man whose heart and hand were bespoken;—but had he only been less complacent, less gracious, less honourable?—she must have wasted her young love, and smarted under the sense of having given it unasked and in vain. Surely Catherine, inexperienced as she was, might have had the mother-wit to anticipate such a probability, and guard against the catastrophe, by being a little more dignified and reserved in allowing scope to her imagination and inclination? I hope that at least so much forethought may be looked for from sensible girls,—I say nothing of silly ones,—in the present generation. I am free to own that if a modern girl permitted her affections to be so easily entangled, with the entanglement so transparently displayed, as was true of Catherine Morland, I for one should at once set her down as a very impulsive, heedless young woman, from whom little self-respect and discretion could be looked for, at any time.

I do not take it upon me to say, whether a young[Pg 154] girl’s chance of winning kindred regard might or might not be imperilled, in proportion to her capacity for practising womanly reticence. For the honour of men, I must hope it would.[27]

It is with diffidence that I presume to differ so far from such a close and accurate reader of human nature as Jane Austen was. But while I look at the different standards of different generations, I say that it would cast a serious reflection on the judgment and disinterestedness of all heroes, real or imaginary, if Jane Austen were in earnest and were right in her inference. This, at least, I entirely believe—that whether or not a girl may more readily gain or lose love by her reserve, without it she will never win respect, either from man or woman, and love without respect is like food without salt, destitute of permanent relish and endurance.

Catherine is eager to go to the cotillon ball, at which she is aware beforehand the Tilneys will be present. “What gown and what head-dress she should wear on the occasion become her chief concern. She cannot be justified in it. Dress is at all times a frivolous distinction, and excessive solicitude about it often destroys its own aim. Catherine knew all this very well; her grand-aunt had read her a lecture on the subject only the Christmas before, and yet she lay awake ten minutes on Wednesday night debating between her spotted and tamboured muslin, and nothing but the shortness of the time prevented her buying a new one for the evening. This would have been an error in judgment, great, though not uncommon, from which one of the other sex rather than her own, a brother rather than a great-aunt, might have warned her; for man only can be aware of the insensibility of man towards a new gown. It would be mortifying to the feelings of many ladies could they be made to understand how little the heart of man is affected by what is[Pg 155] costly or new in their attire, how little it is biassed by the texture of their muslin, and how unsusceptible of peculiar tenderness towards the spotted, the sprigged, the mull, or the jaconet. Woman is fine for her own satisfaction alone. No man will admire her the more, no woman will like her the better for it.”

I have quoted this paragraph because it ought to be studied by the women of the present day. Alas! for the higher intelligence and refinement in fashion, when even the over-elaboration and extravagance of an earlier generation strike a later, as meagre shabbiness. Would that the young girls who now “walk in silk attire,” and crêpe de Chine, and only condescend to tulle over satin, in a variety of evening dresses, could return to the spotted and sprigged muslins which were new when they were clean![28] For old people who remember the grandmothers of modern belles, persist in saying that the faces now set in silver hair and puckered with wrinkles, the figures shrunk and bent, were “fairer,” more graceful far—“lang syne.”

Catherine has engaged herself with the greatest alacrity to walk with the two Tilneys among the beautiful environs of Bath the morning after the ball. The weather proves rainy—but Catherine, after alternations of hope and despondency, fruitless solicitations of Mrs. Allen’s opinion, and equally fruitless wishes that they had such weather as was to be found in “Udolpho” the night that poor St. Aubyn died, for instance—has the great joy of seeing the sky clear. She is still waiting for her friends, when the two Thorpes and James Morland arrive in the greatest hurry to claim her for an excursion to Bristol.

Catherine excuses herself from accompanying the others, on the plea of her pre-engagement to walk with the Tilneys.

[Pg 156]

The Thorpes loudly exclaim at such an objection as not worth mentioning, and will take no denial—the truth being that Isabella, free and easy as she is, cannot well accompany the two gentlemen, for the rest of the day, unless she is countenanced by another lady. The casual mention of Blaize Castle, as certain to be visited in the course of the excursion, shakes even Catherine’s fidelity to the Tilneys. Is it really a castle, an old castle such as they read of?

John Thorpe, with his forward unscrupulous assurance, is ready to pledge himself that it is the oldest castle in the kingdom, with towers and long galleries by dozens.

The wavering Catherine admits she should like to see it, but she cannot give up her walk with the Tilneys. She is sure they will be in Pulteney Street soon.

“‘Not they, indeed,’ cries John Thorpe with decision; ‘for as we turned into Broad Street I saw them. Does he not drive a phaeton with bright chestnuts?’

“‘I do not know, indeed.’

“‘Yes, I know he does; I saw him. You are talking of the man you danced with last night, are not you?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘Well, I saw him at that moment turn up the Lansdowne Road, driving a smart-looking girl.’

“‘Did you, indeed?’

“‘Did, upon my soul, knew him again directly; and he seemed to have got some very pretty cattle too.’

“‘It is very odd. But I suppose they thought it would be too dirty for a walk.’

“‘And well they might, for I never saw so much dirt in my life.’”

Catherine gives way. She starts in an unsettled frame of mind, divided between sorrow for the loss of her walk and still greater vexation at the thought that the Tilneys have not acted well by her, and delight at exploring an edifice like “Udolpho”—as her fancy represents Blaize Castle to be—which John Thorpe freely promises she shall explore in every hole and corner.

[Pg 157]

Are there left in England half-a-dozen romantic girls to whom the opportunity of visiting an old castle would be so great a treat?

But unfortunately for what peace of mind is left to Catherine, as she and John Thorpe rattle along, his question “Who was that girl who looked at you so hard as she went by?” calls her attention to the right-hand pavement, where, to her mingled delight and dismay, she recognises Miss Tilney on her brother’s arm, walking slowly down the street. Catherine sees them both looking back at her.

“‘Stop, stop, Mr. Thorpe!’ she impatiently cried, ‘it is Miss Tilney, it is indeed. How could you tell me they were gone? Stop, stop! I will get out this moment and go to them.’

“But to what purpose did she speak? Thorpe only lashed his horse into a brisker trot; the Tilneys, who had soon ceased to look after her, were in a moment out of sight round the corner of Laura Place, and in another moment she was herself whisked into the Market Place. Still, however, and during the length of another street, she entreated him to stop. ‘Pray, pray stop, Mr. Thorpe. I cannot go on, I will not go on; I must go back to Miss Tilney.’

“But Mr. Thorpe only laughed, smacked his whip, encouraged his horse, made odd noises, and drove on; and Catherine, angry and vexed as she was, having no power of getting away, was obliged to give up the point, and submit. Her reproaches, however, were not spared.

“‘How could you deceive me so, Mr. Thorpe? How could you say that you saw them driving up the Lansdowne Road? I would not have had it happen so for the world. They must think it so strange, so rude of me, to go by them, too, without saying a word! You do not know how vexed I am. I shall have no pleasure at Clifton, nor in anything else. I had rather, ten thousand times rather, get out now and walk back to them. How could you say you saw them driving out in a phaeton?’

[Pg 158]

“Thorpe defended himself very stoutly, declared he had never seen two men so much alike in his life, and would hardly give up the point of its having been Tilney himself.”

It is unnecessary to dwell on Catherine’s distress when even her unassuming, good-natured civility fails her. Her single comfort is Blaize Castle, but Blaize Castle she is not destined to see. It is too late in the day, the horses are not equal to the expedition, and the party have to turn back to Bath.

Catherine ventures to call on Miss Tilney, to explain why she has not kept her appointment. She is not admitted at the house in Milsom Street, though she has a wretched conviction that Miss Tilney is at home—a conviction confirmed by seeing her in a few moments afterwards go out with her father, General Tilney.

Catherine is punished—even, she thinks, too severely—but she is too miserable to be angry.

Catherine next sees the Tilneys at the theatre. Henry Tilney bows, but with a changed countenance; still, he comes round to the Allens’ box to pay his respects to Mrs. Allen, and there Catherine, like the impetuous, humble-minded young girl she is, overwhelms him with the breathlessness and earnestness of her apologies. “Oh! Mr. Tilney, I have been quite wild to speak to you, and make my apologies. You must have thought me so rude; but, indeed, it was not my own fault. Was it, Mrs. Allen? Did not they tell me that Mr. Tilney and his sister were gone out in a phaeton together? And then, what could I do? But I had ten thousand times rather have been with you. Now, had not I, Mrs. Allen?”

The words bring a more cordial, more natural smile to the gentleman’s lips, though he suggests a little sarcastically that he and his sister were at least much obliged to her for wishing them a pleasant walk. She had looked back on purpose.

After all, the lingering air of being piqued, which[Pg 159] Henry Tilney cannot conceal, is the best evidence of Catherine’s dawning influence.

But the stupid girl takes his words literally. “Indeed, I did not wish you a pleasant walk; I never thought of such a thing; but I begged Mr. Thorpe so earnestly to stop; I called out to him as soon as ever I saw you. Now, Mrs. Allen, did not——Oh! you were not there. But indeed I did; and if Mr. Thorpe would only have stopped, I would have jumped out and run after you.”

“Is there a Henry in the world,” exclaims Jane Austen, “who could be insensible to such a declaration?” Perhaps not. Yet we are tempted to wonder if Jane Austen had ever listened to the sarcastic old song—

“The fruit that will fall without shaking
Is rather too mellow for me;”
or to that valuable warning in wooing—

“When a woman is willing,
A man can but look like a fool.”
If all girls were as quickly captivated as Catherine Morland, what would become of the wooing—the pursuit—the probation, during which Elizabeth Barrett Browning asserts a man may be content to be treated “worse than dog or mouse” when it is but the prelude to the girl’s becoming his for ever?

Catherine, in her extreme candour, persists that Miss Tilney must have been angry, since she was in the house, but would not see her—Catherine—when she called.

In Henry Tilney’s hasty explanation that it was his father—there was nothing in it, beyond the circumstance that General Tilney wished his daughter to walk out with him, and could not be kept waiting—we have the first hint that General Tilney has “ways.” He is, for that matter, an extremely tyrannical old gentleman.

[Pg 160]

Catherine has her walk, and for once the reality fulfils the expectation.

Whether intentionally or accidentally, Jane Austen illustrates the contrast between John Thorpe and Henry Tilney by their different estimates of novels. The walking-party had determined to walk round Beechen Cliff—“that noble hill,” Jane Austen calls it, in more than her ordinary chary words of description, “whose beautiful verdure and hanging coppice[29] render it so striking an object from almost every opening in Bath.”

“‘I never look at it,’ said Catherine, as they walked along the side of the river, ‘without thinking of the south of France.’

“‘You have been abroad then?’ said Henry, a little surprised.

“‘Oh, no; I only mean what I have read about. It always puts me in mind of the country that Emily and her father travelled through in the ‘Mysteries of Udolpho.’ But you never read novels, I dare say.’

“‘Why not?’

“‘Because they are not clever enough for you; gentlemen read better books.’

“‘The person, be it gentleman or lady, who has not pleasure in a good novel, must be intolerably stupid. I have read all Mrs. Radcliffe’s works, and most of them with great pleasure. The ‘Mysteries of Udolpho,’ when I had once begun it, I could not lay down again; I remember finishing it in two days, my hair standing on end the whole time.’

“‘Yes,’ added Miss Tilney; ‘and I remember that you undertook to read it aloud to me; and that when I was called away for only five minutes to answer a note, instead of waiting for me, you took the volume into the Hermitage Walk; and I was obliged to stay till you had finished it.’[30]

[Pg 161]

“‘But I really thought before,’ persisted Catherine, ‘young men despised novels amazingly?’

“‘It is amazingly; it may well suggest amazement, if they do, for they read nearly as many as women. I myself have read hundreds and hundreds. Do not imagine that you can cope with me in a knowledge of Julias and Louisas. If we proceed to particulars, and engage in the never-ceasing inquiry of ‘Have you read this?’ or ‘Have you read that?’ I shall soon leave you as far behind me as—what shall I say? I want an appropriate simile—as far as your friend Emily herself left poor Valancourt, when she went with her aunt into Italy. Consider how many years I have had the start of you. I had entered on my studies at Oxford while you were a good little girl, working your sampler at home.’”

About this time Captain Tilney, General Tilney’s eldest son, a handsome, fashionable young man, arrives on a visit to his family. Catherine is most willing to acknowledge his advantages, but his tastes and manners are decidedly inferior, in her opinion, after she hears him, at one of the assemblies, not only protest against every thought of dancing himself, but even laugh openly at his brother Henry for finding it possible.

Isabella, who has begun by announcing her intention to sit all the evening, in compliment to James Morland’s temporary absence, is soon seen dancing with Captain Tilney, in spite of his and her protest.

James Morland’s application to his father for his consent to his marriage with Isabella Thorpe brings a kind and considerate answer. A family living of four hundred a year is to be resigned to James; an estate of nearly equal value is secured to him. The greatest trial is that the young couple must wait two or three years, till James Morland can take orders.

James and Catherine, being good and reasonable children, are perfectly satisfied with their father’s generosity.

Isabella says the prospect is very charming, but says it with a grave face.

[Pg 162]

The period of the Allens’ visit to Bath is drawing to a close; and the question whether they may stay longer or not seems to involve the happiness of Catherine’s whole life; and so, when the lodgings are taken for another fortnight, everything appears secured. “What this additional fortnight was to produce to her beyond the pleasure of sometimes seeing Henry Tilney, made but a small part of Catherine’s speculation;” Jane Austen comments with regard to her heroine’s unreasonable joy. “Once or twice, indeed, since James’s engagement had taught her what could be done, she had got so far as to indulge in a secret ‘perhaps;’ but, in general, the felicity of being with him for the present bounded her views. The present was now comprised in another three weeks; and her happiness being certain for that period, the rest of her life was at such a distance as to excite but little interest.” This is pre-eminently the calculation of seventeen, when a month in anticipation reckons as a year, a year as a lifetime.

However, when Catherine calls for Miss Tilney with the glad news, she receives an unexpected blow. The Tilneys are to quit Bath soon. Poor Catherine cannot hide her dejection, but an ample compensation, far beyond her brightest hopes, awaits her.

Miss Tilney stammers some words of invitation, which are at once seconded by her father. The General, so far from being haughty to Catherine, has distinguished her by an oppressively marked degree of attention, which has rather a tendency to extinguish the frank kindness of his son and daughter.

Catherine is now pressed in the most flatteringly solicitous manner, by this somewhat overpowering fine gentleman, to go with the family to Northanger Abbey, and give his daughter the pleasure of her company there, for a few weeks.

Catherine is to be the Tilneys’ chosen visitor: “She was to be for weeks under the same roof with the person whose society she most prized; and in addition to all the rest; this roof was to be the roof of an Abbey! Her[Pg 163] passion for ancient edifices was next in degree to her passion for Henry Tilney, and castles and abbeys made usually the charm of those reveries which his image did not fill. To see and explore either the ramparts and keep of the one, or the cloisters of the other, had been for many weeks a darling wish, though to be more than the visitor of an hour had seemed too nearly impossible for desire; and yet this was to happen. With all the chances against her of house, hall, place, court and cottage, Northanger turned up an Abbey, and she was to be its inhabitant. Its long damp passages, its narrow cells and ruined chapel, were to be within her daily reach; and she could not entirely subdue the hope of some traditional legends, some awful memorials of an injured and ill-fated nun.”

Catherine’s happiness is not without alloy. Isabella improves the occasion of being with Catherine at the Pump-room one morning, to tell her that John Thorpe is over head and ears in love with her, and to urge his suit, greatly to Catherine’s astonishment and discomfiture. For has not Isabella long professed herself convinced of a mutual attachment between Henry Tilney and her friend?

Catherine, with all the innocence of truth, protests her ignorance of Mr. Thorpe’s wishes, and her incapacity to respond to them.

Isabella accepts her brother’s disappointment with a wonderfully good grace, though she will imply, in spite of Catherine’s indignant denial, that there has been a relinquished flirtation, a change of mind on Catherine’s part, which Isabella would be the last person to blame.

As the girls are speaking, they are joined by Captain Tilney, and Catherine is first bewildered and then shocked to find him addressing her friend and future sister in terms which cannot be mistaken. “‘What! always to be watched in person or proxy?’ he said low, but not too low for Catherine to hear.

“‘Pshaw! nonsense!’ was Isabella’s answer, in the same half-whisper; ‘why do you put such things into[Pg 164] my head? If I could believe it! my spirit, you know, is pretty independent.’

“‘I wish your heart were independent, that would be enough for me.’

“‘My heart, indeed! What can you have to do with hearts? You men have none of you any hearts.’

“‘If we have not hearts we have eyes, and they give us torment enough.’

“‘Do they? I am sorry for it; I am sorry they find anything so disagreeable in me. I will look another way. I hope this pleases you’ (turning her back on him). ‘I hope your eyes are not tormented now.’

“‘Never more so, for the edge of a blooming cheek is still in view, at once too much and too little.’”

Catherine will not remain longer. She is confounded; but still the girl who is so honourable herself can think no greater evil than that Captain Tilney has fallen in love with Isabella, and that Isabella is unconsciously encouraging him—unconsciously it must be, for Isabella’s attachment to James is as certain as their engagement.

But when Catherine sees Isabella admitting Captain Tilney’s attentions in public as readily as they are offered, and allowing him almost an equal share with James of her notice and smiles, charity itself cannot vindicate the lady’s conduct.

Catherine has too much good sense to continue to be deceived. She tries to believe still that Isabella cannot be aware of the pain she is inflicting; but her friend must resent the wilful thoughtlessness, since James is the sufferer.

When Catherine Morland learns that Captain Tilney is to remain in Bath after his family have left, she speaks to Henry Tilney on the subject. She expresses her regret for his brother’s evident admiration of Miss Thorpe, and entreats him to make known her engagement.

“‘My brother does know it.’

“‘Does he? Then why does he stay here?’

[Pg 165]

“He made no reply, and was beginning to talk of something else; but she eagerly continued, ‘Why do not you persuade him to go away? The longer he stays the worse it will be for him at last. It is only staying to be miserable.’

“Henry smiled, and said, ‘I am sure my brother would not wish to do that.’

“‘Then you will persuade him to go away?’

“‘Persuasion is not at command; but pardon me if I cannot even endeavour to persuade him. I have myself told him that Miss Thorpe is engaged. He knows what he is about, and must be his own master.’

“‘No, he does not know what he is about,’ cried Catherine; ‘he does not know the pain he is giving my brother. Not that James has ever told me so, but I am sure he is very uncomfortable.’

“‘And are you sure it is my brother’s doing?’

“‘Yes, very sure.’

“‘Is it my brother’s attentions to Miss Thorpe, or Miss Thorpe’s admission of them, that gives the pain?’”

Catherine, in her ignorance of the ways of the world, wonders General Tilney does not interfere; is sure if he spoke to Captain Tilney he would go away.

Henry Tilney has some trouble in convincing her that her “amiable solicitude” is a little mistaken. Will her brother thank her, either on his own account or on that of Miss Thorpe, for supposing that her affection, or at least her good behaviour, can only be secured by her seeing nothing of Captain Tilney? For anything further, Frederick must soon rejoin his regiment, and what will then become of his acquaintance with Miss Thorpe? The mess-room will drink “Isabella Thorpe” for a fortnight, and she will laugh with Catherine’s brother over poor Tilney’s passion for a month.

This is a novel view of the situation to Catherine, but she cannot refuse comfort from such a quarter; and she parts not only placably but affectionately from her friend.

[Pg 166]

III.
The bustle of the Tilneys starting on their journey is rendered trying by the exactions and complaints of the arrogant, ill-tempered master of the household; still he is all complaisance and sedulous politeness to Miss Morland; and his first fretful murmur at the chaise’s being overcrowded with parcels, is professedly that she will not have room to sit. “And so much was he influenced by this apprehension when he handed her in, that she had some difficulty in saving her own new writing-desk from being thrown out into the street.”

Luckily, the General drives in his son’s curricle; but even the agreeable conversation of Eleanor Tilney, the bliss of their destination, the glory of travelling in “a fashionable chaise and four, postilions handsomely liveried, rising so regularly in their stirrups, and numerous outriders properly mounted,”[31] sink a little under the tediousness of a two hours’ bait at Petty France.

The General, in his anxiety that Catherine may see the country, proposes to her to change places, and drive with his son for the rest of the way.

Catherine’s recent experiences of such driving have not been encouraging, and she recalls an unfavourable opinion delivered too late by Mr. Allen, on the presence of young ladies in young men’s open carriages. For I am glad to be able to show that Catherine, though extremely in love, has neither forgotten duty nor propriety in her love; but backed by the powerful sanction, even the recommendation, of such a judge of good manners as General Tilney, she feels she need have no scruple in giving the consent she longs to give.

Henry Tilney is as far removed from John Thorpe in driving as in everything else. The young clergyman drives so well, so quietly, without making any disturbance, without parading to her, or swearing at the[Pg 167] horses, “so different from the only gentleman-coachman whom it was in her power to compare him with! And then his hat sat so well, and the innumerable capes of his great-coat looked so becomingly important.[32] To be driven by him was, next to dancing with him, certainly the greatest happiness in the world. In addition to every other delight, she had now that of listening to her own praise, of being thanked, at least on his sister’s account, for her kindness in thus becoming her visitor, of hearing it ranked as real friendship and described as creating real gratitude.”

It is a little drawback, certainly, to hear that Henry Tilney has an establishment at his parsonage at Woodston, nearly twenty miles off, where he has to spend some of his time,[33] but what pleasure under the sun is without drawback?

Unfortunately, too, as it proves, Henry Tilney, with his propensity for chaffing, cannot resist making game of his companion with regard to her expectations of Northanger Abbey. He conjures up for her benefit a fac-simile of the abbeys and castles of her beloved romances, and pictures her like Emily in “Udolpho”—conducted by an ancient housekeeper along gloomy passages—standing by a bed with its dark velvet coverlet resembling a pall—inspecting broken lutes and cabinets of ebony, while peals of thunder rattle overhead, and the flame of her lamp sinks in the socket just as she has been impelled to unlock the folding-doors and search through every drawer of the cabinet, and has come upon a roll of manuscript.

In short, Jane Austen, speaking by Henry Tilney, in the most barefaced and liveliest manner, parodies and makes fun of Mrs. Radcliffe’s romances, which she has[Pg 168] praised so highly elsewhere;[34] and this example of the humourist’s satire shows how free it is ordinarily from illiberality and harshness. She laughs merrily here at what she really esteems, the merits of which in another light she is the first to acknowledge.

It is not in a thunderstorm, but under the more prosaic inconvenience of “a scud of rain,” fixing all Catherine’s attention on the welfare of her new straw bonnet, that she arrives at her destination, with only a dim apprehension—from the modern lodge-gates, the smooth gravel of the avenue, and the Rumford grate and ornaments of pretty English china on the chimney-piece of the drawing-room, to which she is hurried—that the Abbey, in one sense, may not come up to her dreams.

The hall has been large and lofty, and there is a broad staircase of shining oak, up which Catherine is taken to her room. But that comfortable room possesses papered walls and a carpeted floor, while the windows are neither less perfect nor dimmer[35] than those of the drawing-room.

Catherine receives some consolation, as she is hastening to remove her riding-habit (the common travelling dress of the day), to dress for dinner, in time to suit the fiery punctuality of the General. Her eye falls on a large, high chest in a deep recess on one side of the fireplace. The chest, which is of cedar, curiously inlaid with some darker wood, and furnished with a tarnished silver lock, might have formed a treasure among the Queen Anne furniture and art curiosities of to-day; but it is not from premature æsthetic tastes that Catherine flies to it, entranced at the sight—it is because the chest looks like a realisation of her visions, a prelude to adventures in[Pg 169] her own person, such as those which her favourite heroines have encountered and surmounted triumphantly.

The incidents which follow the discovery of this chest would be impossible in the days of social science and board schools. They read like exaggerations, even in Jane Austen’s usually temperate, as well as witty, pages.[36]

Then we must keep in remembrance that Catherine Morland was, in age, but sweet, immature seventeen, while George III’s reign was in many things removed from that of Queen Victoria.

Miss Tilney’s maid, and later Miss Tilney herself, surprise Catherine in what looks like burglarious intentions, in her eager investigation of the chest. In the last instance, Catherine has just succeeded in throwing back the lid, and discovering——a nicely-folded white cotton counterpane!

This anti-climax does not prevent the infatuated Catherine, when she has retired for the night, during an appropriate storm of wind and rain, looking about her, at intervals, in pursuit of more old furniture. And just as she is about to step into bed, her eyes light on an ebony and gold cabinet, such as her mischievous lover has described. To be sure the cabinet is not exactly of ebony and gold, but it is of the next thing to them—black and yellow Japan—with the yellow looking like gold. The key is in the door—wonderful to relate, as Henry has said! Catherine cannot sleep till she has turned it. Naturally, the lock tries her[Pg 170] trembling, unfamiliar fingers, but she overcomes its difficulties, only to open drawer after drawer with emptiness revealed. The middle cavity alone remains unexplored. She succeeds with the second lock as with the first, and meets her reward—a roll of paper, pushed far back for concealment, lies before her.

Catherine’s heart flutters, her knees tremble, her cheeks grow pale. She seizes the precious MS. without a doubt as to her right to take possession of it. Has one of her heroines hesitated in similar circumstances? She glances round, as if by instinct, to detect the next accomplishment of Henry Tilney’s predictions, in the waning of her light. It happens to be a half-burnt-down candle needing snuffing, instead of a lamp with the wick burnt to the socket. Sometimes modern prosaic substitutes prove convenient. Catherine has only to snuff her candle to restore its brightness. Alas! in her agitation she snuffs it out, and leaves herself at once in total darkness. Gas might not have served her any better, since gas runs the risk, in these circumstances, of being turned off.

Poor Catherine’s plight has become lamentable, since, as a matter of course, she believes she distinguishes receding footsteps, and the closing of a distant door, the moment she has put out her light. A cold sweat stands on her forehead, the manuscript falls from her hand, and, groping her way to the bed, she jumps in, seeking some suspension of agony by creeping unheroically far underneath the clothes. Sleep must be impossible, and actually eludes Catherine’s grasp till all the clocks about the place have struck three.

The housemaid’s folding back her window-shutters at eight o’clock rouses Catherine to a bright morning and a cheerful fire. With revived spirits and curiosity, she waits only to be alone, in order to surrender herself to the absorbing interest and distinction of her discovery. She sees at once she must not expect a manuscript of equal length to those she is accustomed to read when printed. Here are only some small, unconnected sheets[Pg 171] of paper. “Her greedy eye glanced rapidly over a page. She started at its import. Could it be possible, or did not her senses play her false? An inventory of linen, in coarse and modern characters, seemed all that was before her! If the evidence of sight might be trusted, she held a washing-bill in her hand. She seized another sheet, and saw the same articles, with little variation; a third, a fourth, and a fifth presented nothing new. Shirts, stockings, cravats, and waistcoats faced her in each. Two others, penned by the same hand, marked an expenditure scarcely more interesting in letters, hair-powder, shoe-strings, and breeches ball; and the larger sheet, which had enclosed the rest, seemed by its first cramped line—‘To poultice chesnut mare’—a farrier’s bill! Such was the collection of papers (left, perhaps, as she could then suppose, by the negligence of a servant, in the place whence she had taken them) which had filled her with expectation and alarm, and had robbed her of half her night’s rest! She felt humbled to the dust.”

Catherine fervently trusts that nobody—above all, not Henry Tilney, who is in some respects the originator of her misadventure, but whom, of course, she magnanimously forgives—will ever learn what she has been about.

She soon forgets her affronted discomfiture in a little conversation with Henry Tilney, in the breakfast-parlour, before the others come down. She is praising Miss Tilney’s hyacinths, and adds, “I have just learnt to love a hyacinth.”

“And how might you learn? By accident, or argument?”

“Your sister taught me: I cannot tell how. Mrs. Allen used to take pains, year after year, to make me like them; but I never could, till I saw them, the other day, in Milsom Street. I am naturally indifferent about flowers.”[37]

[Pg 172]

Henry Tilney ends the conversation with the assertion, “At any rate, however, I am pleased that you have learnt to love a hyacinth. The mere habit of learning to love is the thing; and a teachableness of disposition in a young lady is a great blessing. Has my sister a pleasant mode of instruction?”

I need not quote further than that Catherine is delightfully embarrassed, and that she has the happiness of being still more discomposed by a hint from the General when he appears, which does sound as if the formidable great man were deigning to rally the young couple on a sympathetic habit of early rising.

But Catherine is not yet quite cured of her romantic fancies.[38] She has been forced to see that the Abbey, in spite of its indisputable pretensions to antiquity and grandeur, its fine situation, and the ostentatious display made by the present owner of his rank and fortune, in its gardens and hot-houses, is, according to her standard, a mere commonplace, handsome, country house. She has found out for herself that old chests and cabinets may be no better than humbugs; still, she must hanker after family secrets and terrible mysteries. She cannot like pompous, despotic General Tilney, before whom his daughter trembles, and his sons grow silent—let him be ever so grandly polite to herself—not even though he seems to imply his gracious approbation, before it is asked, of his son Henry’s suit, with the General’s earnest desire that Catherine may accede to that suit.

Perverse Catherine takes it into her head that the General interferes to prevent her from being shown over the Abbey, and that he avoids certain parts of the grounds. Her rampant, over-stimulated imagination leaps to the conclusion, on the customary grounds, that[Pg 173] these suspicions peculiarities have to do with General Tilney’s late wife, of whom her husband never speaks, who has died rather suddenly, during her daughter’s absence from home.

Has Mrs. Tilney died a natural death? Catherine begins to question herself quakingly; or is she dead at all? Can her children have been imposed upon? May she not be secluded and imprisoned in some remote turret or dungeon, to serve an unknown purpose of her unworthy husband? In that case, Catherine must be destined to restore the unfortunate Mrs. Tilney to her children and the world.[39]

Catherine considers that she has a strong confirmation of her worst fears in what she is told of the General’s habits of sitting up late, and walking up and down his room at night.

Before taking it upon her to act the part of a private detective in any more original or offensive manner, Catherine sets out one evening to enter secretly the closed room which Eleanor has pointed out to her as that in which her mother died.

Catherine goes into the Bluebeard chamber—which is certainly not kept locked—on tiptoe. “She beheld what fixed her to the spot, and agitated every feature. She saw a large, well-proportioned apartment, a handsome dimity bed unoccupied, arranged with a housemaid’s care, a bright Bath stove, mahogany wardrobes and neatly-painted chairs, on which the warm beams of a western sun gaily poured through two sash-windows. Catherine had expected to have her feelings worked upon, and worked upon they were. Astonishment and doubt first seized them, and a shortly-succeeding ray of common sense added some bitter emotions of shame.”

She is endeavouring to retreat as quickly as she has[Pg 174] come. She has got as far as the gallery, when she hears footsteps approaching. It would be awkward for a servant, it would be dreadful for the General to meet her prowling about there.

Happily for Catherine, though she cannot think so at the time, it is Henry Tilney who comes running up the side stair.

“‘Mr. Tilney,’ she cries, taken by surprise, ‘how did you come here?’

“‘How did I come up that staircase?’ he echoes, as much astonished as she is; ‘because it is my nearest way from the stable-yard to my own chamber; and why should I not come up it?’

“Catherine recollected herself, blushed deeply, and could say no more. He seemed to be looking in her countenance for that explanation which her words did not afford. She moved on towards the gallery.

“‘And may I not, in my turn,’ said he, as he pushed back the folding doors, ‘ask how came you here? This passage is at least as extraordinary a road from the breakfast-parlour to your apartment as that staircase can be from the stables to mine.’

“‘I have been,’ said Catherine, looking down, ‘to see your mother’s room.’

“‘My mother’s room! Is there anything extraordinary to be seen there?’

“‘No, nothing at all. I thought you did not mean to come back till to-morrow.’”

But he will not be put off the subject, and a few more skilful questions enlighten him with regard to her preposterously uncharitable surmises. Though Henry Tilney is the gay deceiver who has played on her imagination not so long ago, he is considerably scandalised at the length to which she has gone. After gravely explaining to her all the simple, natural circumstances of his mother’s illness and death, and of his father’s sincere affliction for his loss—since, though his temper may have injured her in life, his judgment never did—the son takes Catherine to task very earnestly,[Pg 175] if tenderly, for her most unwarrantable flights of fancy. “Dear Miss Morland, consider the dreadful nature of the suspicions you have entertained. What have you been judging from? Remember the country and the age in which we live. Remember that we are English, that we are Christians.”

Catherine is punished. In the retirement of her own room she cries bitterly. She hates herself for her folly, and becomes a more reasonable woman for all time to come.[40]

IV.
Catherine is recalled from her compunction and mortification, which unquestionably Henry Tilney soothes to the best of his power, by the trials of real life. After nine successive mornings of looking in vain for letters, Catherine receives one from James at Oxford. It is a short, manly letter, full of pain, but full also of self-command and forbearance, announcing the breaking off of his engagement with Miss Thorpe, and hoping, for his sister’s sake, that her visit to Northanger Abbey may be over before Captain Tilney makes known his engagement.

Catherine cannot conceal her sorrow for James, and is soon induced to tell what will not remain long concealed to her sympathising friends, Eleanor and Henry Tilney. Isabella Thorpe has given up Catherine’s brother, and is to marry theirs. Both her listeners—Henry Tilney especially—are full of pity for Catherine’s wondering sorrow that such fickleness and everything[Pg 176] which is bad can exist in the world and make her brother James their victim; but the Tilneys doubt that part of her information which relates to their brother. They do not dispute Frederick’s share in the lovers’ quarrel, but they are exceedingly sceptical with regard to Frederick’s marrying Isabella Thorpe—a lawyer’s daughter without any portion. Henry’s incredulity is only shaken by the recollection of Frederick’s former pretensions and confidence in himself, and by the fact that he, Henry, has too good an opinion of Miss Thorpe’s prudence to suppose that she would part with one gentleman before another was secured.

Henry Tilney’s humour asserts itself, as usual, through his vexation. He begs Eleanor to prepare for a sister-in-law open and guileless as the day. He heartily endorses Catherine’s innocent argument—intended to be consolatory—that, perhaps, though Isabella has behaved so badly to the Morland family, she may behave better to the Tilneys—she may be constant to Captain Tilney.

“‘Indeed, I am afraid she will,’ replied Henry Tilney, ‘unless a baronet should come in her way; that is Frederick’s only chance. I will get the Bath paper and look over the arrivals.’

“‘You think it is all for ambition, then?’ inquired Catherine, at length beginning to see there were some things which looked very like it. ‘I never was so deceived in any one’s character in my life.’

“‘Among all the great variety you have known and studied,’ Henry Tilney cannot resist saying.” And really the masterful young lover makes game of his simple mistress so habitually, that one is tempted to imagine he is purposely testing the sweetness of her temper, and her freedom from pride and vanity.

He is soon rallying her on the loss which she herself has sustained. Society must have become irksome—the very idea of such amusements as she has shared with Isabella Thorpe cannot but prove abhorrent to her. Catherine would not now, for instance, go to a ball for[Pg 177] the world. She must feel that she has no longer any friend to whom she can speak without reserve, on whose regard she can depend.

But Catherine answers him very sensibly, and with a charming sincerity that disarms his mocking mood. “No,” said Catherine, “ought I? To say the truth, though I am hurt and grieved that I cannot still love her, that I am never to hear from her, perhaps never to see her again, I do not feel so very much afflicted as one would have thought.”

“You feel as you always do, what is most to the credit of human nature. Such feelings ought to be investigated, that they may know themselves.”

We can easily understand how Catherine’s spirits revive under this conversation.

The happiest episode of Catherine’s visit to Northanger Abbey is her going with the Tilneys—the idea of the visit having originated with the General—to “eat their mutton” with Henry in his parsonage at Woodston. An abbey has become no more to Catherine than any other building. There is nothing now so alluring to her imagination as the unpretending comfort of a “well-connected parsonage”—something like Catherine’s home at Fullerton, but better. Fullerton has its faults, but Woodston probably has none.

Before the visit, it has seemed to Catherine that the Wednesday when she is to go to Woodston will never come. She dreads the arrival in the meantime of Captain Tilney to ask his father’s consent to his marriage. But no Captain Tilney makes his appearance, and all goes well. The day comes, proves fine, and Catherine treads on air. “By ten o’clock the chaise and four conveyed the party from the Abbey, and after an agreeable drive of almost twenty miles they entered Woodston, a large and populous village in a situation not unpleasant. Catherine was ashamed to say how pretty she thought it, as the General seemed to think an apology necessary for the flatness of the country and size of the village; but in her heart she preferred it to[Pg 178] any place she had ever been at, and looked with great admiration at every neat house above the rank of a cottage, and at all the little chandler’s shops which they passed. At the farther end of the village, and tolerably disengaged from the rest of it, stood the parsonage, a new-built, substantial, stone house, with its semi-circular sweep and green gates; and as they drove up to the door, Henry, with the friends of his solitude—a large Newfoundland puppy and two or three terriers—was ready to receive and make much of them.”

The General’s hints and allusions, with his requests for Catherine’s opinion and approval, which now become more conspicuous and significant than ever, may be embarrassing, but it is a delicious embarrassment.

Catherine thinks the house the most comfortable in England, and cannot hide her admiration of the prettily-shaped unfurnished drawing-room. “‘Oh! why do you not fit up this room, Mr. Tilney? What a pity not to have it fitted up. It is the prettiest room I ever saw; it is the prettiest room in the world!’

“‘I trust,’ said the General with a most satisfied smile, ‘that it will very speedily be furnished: it waits only for a lady’s taste.’

“‘Well, if it was my house, I should never sit anywhere else. Oh! what a sweet little cottage there is among the trees; apple-trees too! It is the prettiest cottage——’

“‘You like it? you approve of it as an object? It is enough. Henry, remember that Robinson is spoken to about it. The cottage remains.’

“Such a compliment recalled all Catherine’s consciousness and silenced her directly; and though pointedly applied to by the General for her choice of the prevailing colour of the paper and hangings, nothing like an opinion on the subject could be drawn from her. The influence of fresh objects and fresh air, however, was of great use in dissipating those embarrassing associations; and having reached the ornamental part of the premises, consisting of a walk round two sides of a meadow, on[Pg 179] which Henry’s genius had begun to act about half a year ago, she was sufficiently recovered to think it prettier than any pleasure-ground she had ever been in before, though there was not a shrub in it higher than the green branch in the corner.

“A saunter into other meadows, and through part of the village, with a visit to the stables to examine some improvements, and a charming game of play with a litter of puppies just able to roll about, brought them to four o’clock, when Catherine scarcely thought it could be three. At four they were to dine, and at six to set off on their return. Never had any day passed so quickly.”

Yet reflection might have suggested one drawback to the delights of Woodston. Catherine had already marvelled and even exclaimed when Henry Tilney proposed to go away from Northanger several days before the date of their visit, in order to make preparations for their entertainment at Woodston. How could he think so much trouble necessary for their dinner, when the General had particularly desired him not to put himself about, and had made a point of his providing nothing extraordinary? But Henry had only smiled, and started betimes for Woodston.

Now on the occasion of the visit, Catherine “could not but observe that the abundance of the dinner did not seem to create the smallest astonishment in the General; nay, that he was even looking at the side-table for cold meat which was not there. His son and daughter’s observations were of a different kind. They had seldom seen him eat so heartily at any table but his own; and never before known him so little disconcerted by the melted butter being oiled.”

Catherine might at least have foreseen that, however eager the General was to welcome her as a daughter-in-law, he would prove an alarming parent to visit Woodston in days to come.

The morning after the happy day at Woodston, Catherine is surprised by a letter from Isabella Thorpe,[Pg 180] which is so cleverly characteristic of that transparently designing and entertaining girl, I must give it all.

“Bath, April——.
“My Dearest Catherine,—I received your two kind letters with the greatest delight, and have a thousand apologies to make for not answering them sooner. I really am quite ashamed of my idleness; but in this horrid place one can find time for nothing. I have had my pen in my hand to begin a letter to you almost every day since you left Bath, but have always been prevented by some silly trifler or other. Pray write to me soon, and direct at my own home. Thank God! we leave this vile place to-morrow. Since you went away I have had no pleasure in it; the dust is beyond anything; and everybody one cares for is gone. I believe if I could see you I should not mind the rest, for you are dearer to me than anybody can conceive. I am quite uneasy about your dear brother, not having heard from him since he went to Oxford, and am fearful of some misunderstanding. Your kind offices will set all right. He is the only man I ever did or could love, and I trust you will convince him of it. The spring fashions are partly down, and the hats the most frightful you can imagine. I hope you spend your time pleasantly, but am afraid you never think of me. I will not say all that I could of the family you are with, because I would not be ungenerous, and set you against those you esteem; but it is very difficult to know whom to trust, and young men never know their minds two days together. I rejoice to say that the young man whom of all others I particularly abhor has left Bath. You will know from this description I must mean Captain Tilney, who, as you may remember, was amazingly disposed to follow and tease me, before you went away. Afterwards he got worse, and became quite my shadow. Many girls might have been taken in, for never were such attentions; but I knew the fickle sex too well. He went away to his regiment two days ago, and I trust[Pg 181] I shall never be plagued with him again. He is the greatest coxcomb I ever saw, and amazingly disagreeable. The last two days he was always by the side of Charlotte Davis. I pitied his taste, but took no notice of him. The last time we met was in Bath Street, and I turned directly into a shop that he might not speak to me; I would not even look at him. He went into the Pump-room afterwards, but I would not have followed for all the world. Such a contrast between him and your brother! Pray send me some news of the latter; I am quite unhappy about him; he seemed so uncomfortable when he went away, with a cold, or something that affected his spirits. I would write to him myself, but have mislaid his direction; and as I hinted above, am afraid he took something in my conduct amiss. Pray explain everything to his satisfaction; or if he still harbours any doubt, a line from himself to me, or a call at Putney when next in town, might set all to rights. I have not been to the rooms this age, nor to the play, except going in last night with the Hodges, for a frolic, at half-price. They teased me into it; and I was determined they should not say I shut myself up because Tilney was gone. We happened to sit by the Mitchells, and they pretended to be quite surprised to see me out. I knew their spite: at one time they could not be civil to me, but now they are all friendship; but I am not such a fool as to be taken in by them. You know I have a pretty good spirit of my own. Anne Mitchell has tried to put on a turban like mine, as I wore it the week before at the concert, but made wretched work of it. It happened to become my odd face, I believe; at least Tilney told me so at the time, and said every eye was upon me; but he is the last man whose word I would take. I wear nothing but purple now; I know I look hideous in it, but no matter; it is your dear brother’s favourite colour. Lose no time, my dearest, sweetest Catherine, in writing to him and to me,

“Who ever am, &c.”
[Pg 182]

But the upright, unsuspicious young girl who thinks no evil, is not a fool, and in this respect she has a great advantage over such female characters as the Amelia of another great humourist, Thackeray. It is refreshing to learn that the inconsistencies, contradictions, and falsehoods of that letter strike Catherine from the very first. “She was ashamed of Isabella, and ashamed of having ever loved her. The professions of attachment were now as disgusting, as her excuses were empty, and her demands impudent.” “Write to James on her behalf! No, James should never hear Isabella’s name mentioned by her again.”

On Henry’s arrival from Woodston, Catherine makes known to him and Eleanor their brother’s safety, congratulating them with sincerity on it, and reading aloud the most material passages of her letter with strong indignation. When she has finished it, “So much for Isabella,” she cries, “and for all our intimacy. She must think me an idiot, or she could not have written so; but perhaps this has served to make her character better known to me than mine is to her. I see what she has been about. She is a vain coquette, and her tricks have not answered. I do not believe she had ever any regard either for James or for me, and I wish I had never known her.”

“It will soon be as if you never had,” said Henry.

V.
The unpleasant sequel of Catherine Morland’s visit to Northanger Abbey is, we trust, barely possible in our day. The unworthy resentment, unworthily vented on an innocent victim by an arrogant, worldly-minded man, foiled in his selfish schemes, and enraged at finding himself taken in by so shallow a conspirator as John Thorpe, may be common enough at all times; but, at[Pg 183] least, we live in a generation when men do not wear their tempers, any more than their vices, on their sleeves.

General Tilney has gone up to London, while Catherine’s visit to Northanger Abbey is prolonged at Eleanor Tilney’s request, with her father’s full approval. The girls have been left alone one evening, by Henry’s having found himself under the necessity of taking his curate’s place at Woodston. They are about to separate at eleven o’clock at night, when they hear a carriage drive up to the door, followed by the loud noise of the door-bell.

Eleanor predicts the unexpected arrival of her elder brother Frederick, and Catherine retreats to her room in some discomposure. But her trepidation at the notion of encountering her brother’s rival is nothing compared to her affright when, half an hour later, she discovers her friend Eleanor hovering about Catherine’s door, in a state of extreme agitation. Eleanor is the reluctant, grieved, and affronted messenger from her father to the guest whom he has hitherto delighted to honour. General Tilney has recollected an engagement which will take the whole family away from Northanger Abbey on Monday (this day is Saturday). The Tilneys are all going to Lord Longtown’s, near Hereford, for a fortnight. General Tilney has sent Eleanor, her heart swelling with sorrow and shame, to tell Catherine of a departure which, in the most unceremonious and unkind manner, compels her own.

Great and unpleasant as her surprise is, I am glad to say Catherine displays dawning dignity. She suppresses her feelings, speaks of a second engagement’s yielding to a first, and declines to take offence. She will finish her visit to Northanger Abbey at some other time, and cannot Eleanor come to her? Happy thought! cannot Eleanor come to Fullerton on her way back from Herefordshire?

“It will not be in my power, Catherine,” Eleanor answers briefly, in awkwardness and dejection.

Still Catherine continues resolutely cheerful. Let[Pg 184] Eleanor come when she can. Then Catherine betrays she is calculating on bidding another friend good-bye. She will be able to go when the rest set out on Monday, she says. It does not matter, though word has not been forwarded to her father and mother. The General, she hopes, will send a servant with her half-way. She will soon be at Salisbury, and then she will only be nine miles from home.

My readers must remember that the inconveniences of young ladies travelling alone were multiplied indefinitely, and even magnified to dangers, when girls had to go in post-chaises, or by coaches, over rough roads, and in a very deliberate fashion—largely affected by the merits or defects of the inns on the route, the horses, and, above all, the weather—even granting that highwaymen had waxed scarce by the close of last century.

Poor Eleanor has the still harder task of dashing these modest expectations to the ground. The General has sent his daughter with the unconscionably insulting and unfeeling message that Catherine must leave early next morning. Even the choice of the hour is not left to her: the carriage is ordered at seven o’clock, and no servant will be offered to her.

I am fain to think such rude insolence, such an ungentlemanlike and unfatherly breach of hospitality to, and consideration for, a young girl—his invited guest, his daughter’s friend—could seldom have been perpetrated by the most irresponsible member of the old “quality”—the most selfish tyrant who ever figured in an antiquated army list. I believe General Tilney’s action on this occasion to be one of the few-and-far-between exaggerations to be found in Jane Austen’s earlier novels.

Catherine sits down breathless and speechless under the outrage. She can scarcely listen to Eleanor’s earnest, humble apologies, her faltering explanations that her father’s temper is not happy, and something has occurred recently to ruffle it in an uncommon degree.

[Pg 185]

When Catherine speaks, after she has put the one wistful, fruitless question, “Have I offended the General?” it is to say, quietly and firmly, that she is very sorry if she has offended Eleanor’s father; it is the last thing she would willingly have done. She bids Eleanor not be unhappy; a few days longer would not have made any great difference. The journey of seventy miles by post will be nothing. She can be ready at seven. She begs to be called in time.

In short, Catherine behaves at this crisis with a simple self-respect and an absence of either rancour or frenzy which brings her out in striking and agreeable contrast to the rampaging termagants of later fiction.

But when she is left alone, poor young Catherine cannot so much as attempt to persuade herself that she has not been very badly treated, and that she is not smarting under the sense of the unprovoked ill-usage in addition to her own little private stock of wretchedness. For not only has the polite, high-bred General Tilney, who had seemed so particularly fond of her, behaved to her with gross incivility, there is the crowning misery of the knowledge that the false and barbarous General is Henry Tilney’s father, and that she will not even see Henry to hear what he thinks of the cruel injustice, and to bid him farewell. Besides, what will her father and mother, the Allens, and the world think of the disgraceful indignity which has been put upon her, the bitter mortification to which she has been subjected?

But there is no help for it, and though sleep is impossible, Catherine can be as punctual as her friend Eleanor, who is up to do all that the most sincere affection and hearty regret can contrive, to atone for her father’s conduct. Catherine may be unable to swallow a mouthful when she thinks of the last breakfast in the same room: “Happy, happy breakfast! for Henry had been there; Henry had sat by her and helped her.” But she is able to decline decidedly, though tenderly, to write to Eleanor when Catherine finds that correspondence has been prohibited between the girls, and the one[Pg 186] letter, announcing Catherine’s safe arrival, for which Eleanor entreats, must be directed under cover to her maid Alice. It is only Eleanor’s distress at her refusal which draws from Catherine a promise to commit this single infringement of the prohibition.

At the last moment, had it not been for Eleanor Tilney’s anxious forethought in ascertaining whether Catherine’s purse would meet the requirements of the journey, the inexperienced young girl would have found herself “turned from the house without even the means of getting home.” The necessary loan is quickly offered and accepted, but this realisation of the situation so overwhelms the two girls that they exchange their parting embrace in silence. Catherine forces her quivering lips to leave “My kind remembrance for my absent friend,” but the reference is too much for her, and she has to hide her face as she jumps into the chaise and is driven from the door.

The only solution which Catherine can think of, for the unaccountable change in the General’s behaviour to her, is too dreadful for her to dwell upon, though it has a serio-comic effect, as Jane Austen no doubt intended, on the reader. Can General Tilney have found out, by any means short of a tremendous breach of faith on the part of Henry or Eleanor Tilney, that Catherine has been so foolish and wicked as to suspect him of being a murderer, and is he now revenging himself upon her, almost justifiably, by refusing to let her remain in the same house with him, or to hold any farther communication with his family?

The real explanation may as well be given here. Catherine’s one great offence in the General’s eyes is that she is less rich and prosperous in every way than he had believed her to be. The fine gentleman is capable of the most mercenary efforts for the aggrandisement of his family. His greed has caused him to fall an easy prey to so vulgar a schemer as John Thorpe. In the days when Isabella Thorpe and her brother were ready to hail the probability of a double family alliance[Pg 187] with James Morland and his sister. General Tilney had chanced to notice his son’s attentions to Catherine in the theatre at Bath. Being on speaking terms with John Thorpe, the General had not disdained to fish for some information with regard to the young lady’s circumstances.

John Thorpe, in his vanity and bluster, had bragged his very best. He was not content with representing the Morlands’ prospects invested with the brilliance which his credulous imagination and that of Isabella, stimulated by self-interest, had already bestowed on them, but added twice as much to everything, for the grandeur of the moment. “By doubling what he chose to think the amount of Mr. Morland’s preferment, trebling his private fortune, bestowing a rich aunt, and sinking half the children, he was able to represent the whole family to the General in a most respectable light. For Catherine, however, the peculiar object of the General’s curiosity and his own speculations, he had yet something more in reserve; and the ten or fifteen thousand which her father could give her would be a pretty addition to Mr. Allen’s estate. Her intimacy there had made him seriously determine on her being handsomely legacied hereafter, and to speak of her as the almost acknowledged future heiress of Fullerton naturally followed.”

General Tilney had not doubted the authority of his informant, and had shaped his course accordingly. He had been enlightened as to his mistake by the very person who had deceived him. The General had encountered Thorpe in town, when under the influence of exactly opposite feelings—irritated by Catherine’s refusal, and yet more by the failure of an endeavour to reconcile James Morland to Isabella—John Thorpe turned, and not only coolly contradicted every word he had ever said to the advantage of the Morlands, he went as far in lying to their disadvantage. Mr. Morland was not a man either of substance or credit. He had not been able to give his son even a decent maintenance in[Pg 188] the contemplation of his marriage. The whole Morland family were necessitous—numerous, too, almost beyond example; by no means respected in their own neighbourhood; aiming at a style of life to which they were not entitled; seeking to better themselves by wealthy connections; a forward, scheming race. (I hope my readers admire the accuracy with which, in slandering the Morlands, John Thorpe describes himself and his sister, in fulfilment of the adage, that as we do ourselves we judge our neighbours.)

The horrified General pronounced the name of Allen.

Here, too, Thorpe had found out his error. The Allens had lived near the Morlands too long; besides, John Thorpe knew the young man on whom the Fullerton estate must devolve.

General Tilney had heard enough. He set off in a fury for the Abbey, to undo his own performance.

In the meantime Catherine is travelling home to Fullerton. “To return in such a manner was almost to destroy the pleasure of a meeting with those whom she loved best, even after an absence such as hers—an eleven weeks’ absence.”

“She rather dreaded than sought for the first view of that well-known spire, which would announce her within twenty miles of home. Salisbury she had known to be her point on leaving Northanger; but after the first stage, she had been indebted to the post-masters for the names of the places which were then to conduct her to it, so great had been her ignorance of her route. She met with nothing, however, to distress or frighten her. Her gentle, civil manners, and liberal pay, procured her all the attention that a traveller like herself could require; and stopping only to change horses, she travelled on for about eleven hours,[41] without accident or alarm; and between six and seven o’clock in the evening found herself entering Fullerton.”

[Pg 189]

VI.
Jane Austen has here an excellent opportunity for one of her ironical paragraphs. “A heroine returning at the close of her career to her native village in all the triumph of recovered reputation, and all the dignity of a countess, with a long train of noble relations in their several phaetons, and three waiting-maids in a travelling chaise-and-four behind her, is an event on which the pen of the contriver may well delight to dwell; it gives credit to every conclusion, and the author must share in the glory she so liberally bestows. But my affair is widely different: I bring back my heroine to her home in solitude and disgrace, and no sweet elation of spirits can lead me into minuteness. A heroine in a hack post-chaise is such a blow upon sentiment as no attempt at grandeur or pathos can withstand. Swiftly, therefore, shall her postboy drive through the village, amid the gaze of sundry groups, and speedy shall be her descent from it.”

But the very next sentences are full of the warm human kindness of the humourist in opposition to the cold cynicism of the mere satirist. “But whatever might be the distress of Catherine’s mind as she thus advanced towards the parsonage, and whatever the humiliation of her biographer in relating it, she was preparing enjoyment of no every-day nature for those to whom she went; first, in the appearance of her carriage, and secondly, in herself. The chaise of a traveller being a rare sight in Fullerton, the whole family were immediately at the window; and to have it stop at the sweep-gate was a pleasure to brighten every eye, and occupy every fancy—a pleasure quite unlooked-for by all but the two youngest children, a boy and a girl of six and four years old, who expected a brother and a sister in every carriage. Happy the glance that first distinguished Catherine! Happy the voice that proclaimed the discovery! But whether such happiness[Pg 190] were the lawful property of George or Harriet could never be exactly understood.

“Her father, mother, Sarah, George and Harriet, all assembled at the door to welcome her with affectionate eagerness, was a sight to awaken the best feelings of Catherine’s heart; and in the embrace of each, as she stepped from the carriage, she found herself soothed beyond anything that she had believed possible. So surrounded, so caressed, she was even happy. In the joyfulness of family love everything for a short time was subdued; and the pleasure of seeing her leaving them at first little leisure for calm curiosity, they were all seated round the tea-table, which Mrs. Morland had hurried for the comfort of the poor traveller, whose pale and jaded looks soon caught her notice, before any inquiry so direct as to demand a positive answer was addressed to her.”

Even the soreness of the explanation becomes bearable because of the true fellow-feeling with which it is heard. Besides, though the Morlands cannot but be hurt and angry on account of the insult to their daughter, they are not naturally irritable people, and do not dwell on the injury.

“It was a strange business, and he must be a very strange man,” soon become words enough to express their indignation and wonder. In fact, her father and mother are much too philosophic for Catherine’s feelings when she has to listen to such sentences as “Catherine is safe home, and our comfort does not depend on General Tilney;” “This has been a strange acquaintance, soon made and soon ended. And you were sadly out of luck, too, in your Isabella. Ah! poor James! well, we must live and learn; and the next new friends you make I hope will be better worth keeping.”

Catherine’s great comfort at this time is in walking over to the Allens, to talk with Mrs. Allen over their never-to-be-forgotten visit to Bath. If Mrs. Allen is neither very wise nor very witty, nor possessed of any penetration to speak of—at least she mentions Henry[Pg 191] Tilney’s name occasionally, and calls him a very agreeable young man.

For two days Mrs. Morland bears with her eldest daughter’s restlessness and sadness, but on the third morning the mother remonstrates: “My dear Catherine, I am afraid you are growing quite a fine lady. I do not know when poor Richard’s cravats would be done, if he had no friend but you,[42] your head runs too much upon Bath; but there is a time for everything—a time for balls and plays, and a time for work. You have had a long run of amusement, and now you must try to be useful.”

Catherine took up her work directly, saying, in a dejected voice, that her head did not run upon Bath—much.

“Then you are fretting about General Tilney, and that is very simple of you; for ten to one whether you ever see him again. You should never fret about trifles.” After a short silence, “I hope, my Catherine, you are not getting out of humour with home, because it is not so grand as Northanger; that would be turning your visit into an evil, indeed. Wherever you are, you should always be contented, but especially at home, because there you must spend the most of your time. I did not quite like, at breakfast, to hear you talk so much about the French bread at Northanger.”

“I am sure I do not care about the bread. It is all the same to me what I eat.”

“There is a very clever essay in one of the books upstairs upon much such a subject—about young girls who have been spoilt for home by great acquaintance—the ‘Mirror,’ I think—I will look it out for you some day or other, because I am sure it will do you good.”

Do sensible, kindly mothers still select such essays as those in Henry Mackenzie’s papers, and bring them for their daughters to read, with a sanguine expectation that[Pg 192] the essays will answer their purpose? If not, is it because girls are less docile than they were wont to be, or because they are apt to imagine that they are considerably better informed than their elders, who have been in the world twice as long?

Mrs. Morland goes to fetch the work in question, but household matters keep the busy mistress of the family absent for some time. When she returns, she is unaware that a visitor has been shown in while she was away, and is surprised on re-entering the room to find a young man there she has never seen before.

With a look of much respect he immediately rises, and is introduced to Mrs. Morland by her conscious daughter as “Mr. Henry Tilney.”

With the embarrassment of real feeling he begins to apologise for his appearance there, “acknowledging that after what had passed he had little right to expect a welcome at Fullerton, and stating his impatience to be assured of Miss Morland’s having reached her home in safety as the cause of his intrusion.”

He does not address himself to an illiberal judge. Far from comprehending him and his sister in their father’s misconduct, Mrs. Morland has always been well disposed to both, and instantly pleased by his appearance, receives him with the simple professions of unaffected good-will, “thanking him for such an attention to her daughter, assuring him that the friends of her children were always welcome there, and entreating him to say not another word of the past.”

He is not disinclined to obey her request, trying as the situation is, while the agitated, happy Catherine sits perfectly silent in the conversation about the weather and the roads, which follows, “but her glowing cheek and brightened eye made her mother trust that this good-natured visit would, at least, set her heart at ease for a time; and gladly, therefore, did she lay aside the first volume of ‘The Mirror’ for a future hour.”

Then Henry Tilney, after a couple of minutes’ silence, and an inquiry whether the Allens are at[Pg 193] Fullerton, with a rising colour, asks Catherine whether she will have the goodness to show him the way to her friends’ house?

“You may see the house from this window, sir,” is a piece of most malapropos information volunteered by Catherine’s younger sister Sarah, which produces only a bow of acknowledgment from the gentleman.

But good-natured, considerate Mrs. Morland comes to his aid. She sincerely pities his painful position, and believes he may have something to say, on his father’s account, which will be more easily said to Catherine alone. She sends away the couple together to the Allens.

Mrs. Morland is not entirely mistaken. Henry Tilney has some explanations to give on his father’s behalf, but “his first purpose was to explain himself, and before they reached Mr. Allen’s grounds he had done it so well that Catherine did not think it could ever be repeated too often.”

Jane Austen thus coolly defines the lovers’ relations:—Catherine “was assured of his affections, and that heart in return was solicited which, perhaps, they pretty equally knew was already entirely his own; for, though Henry was now sincerely attached to her—though he felt and delighted in all the excellences of her character, and truly loved her society—I must confess that his affection originated in nothing better than gratitude; or, in other words, that a persuasion of her partiality for him had been the only cause of his giving her a serious thought. It is a new circumstance in romance, I acknowledge, dreadfully derogatory to a heroine’s dignity; but if it be as new in common life, the credit of a wild imagination will at least be all my own.”

It is only after the pair have, in the formal phraseology of the day, “waited on the Allens,” when Henry Tilney talks at random, and Catherine Morland, wrapped in the contemplation of her unutterable happiness, scarcely opens her lips; that she hears, to her dismay, from her lover what has passed between him and his[Pg 194] father only two days before. On Henry’s return from Woodston to Northanger, the General had told him angrily of Miss Morland’s departure, and forbidden him to think of her any more.

But if ever a young man is justified in acting in defiance of such a command, it is Henry Tilney. He has not only been encouraged in cherishing and displaying an attachment for Catherine, his father has in every possible way compromised his son, and bound him, in honour no less than in affection, to the young girl from whom General Tilney now seeks all at once, in the most unjust and despotic manner, to separate Henry.

It can be no matter to a young fellow who has never shared the General’s mercenary motives, and who is possessed of the sentiments of a man and a gentleman, that his father has been misled, and has committed himself to the course he has taken under an error.

The father and son, after their meeting and explanation, have parted in serious disagreement, and Henry Tilney has repaired, on his own responsibility, to Fullerton. But he has considerately saved Catherine from the obligation to a conscientious rejection of his addresses, by engaging her faith before telling her what had passed.

Luckily Mr. and Mrs. Morland, when they are appealed to, and have got over their surprise at being asked to give their consent to Henry Tilney’s suit to their daughter, are inclined to be moderate and indulgent in their views. Their parental pride and affection are gratified; they have not a single objection to urge against the young man personally. They recognise his good manners and good sense, and they are ready to give him credit for his good character. “Catherine would make a sad, heedless young housekeeper, to be sure,” was the mother’s foreboding remark; but quick comes the consolation of there being nothing like practice.

The one obstacle is, that while Henry Tilney’s father refuses his consent to the marriage, Mr. and Mrs. Morland[Pg 195] cannot formally sanction an engagement. Their tempers are mild, but their principles are steady. They do not demand a great show of regard, but a decent acquiescence must be given. The General’s money may go. Henry Tilney’s present income is enough for independence and comfort, and he is entitled eventually, under his mother’s marriage settlement, to a very considerable fortune. But he must at least have his father’s countenance to his proposals.

The young people can neither be surprised nor can they complain, however much they may deplore the decision. They part for the time, hoping against hope for a speedy change in the General. “Henry returned to what was now his only home, to watch over his young plantations and extend his improvements for her sake, to whose share in them he looked anxiously forward; and Catherine remained at Fullerton to cry. Whether the torments of absence were softened by a clandestine correspondence let us not inquire. Mr. and Mrs. Morland never did; they had been too kind to exact any promise, and whenever Catherine received a letter, as at that time happened pretty often, they always looked another way.”

The probation ends much sooner than might have been expected, and the cause of the General’s yielding is the marriage of his daughter, in the course of the summer, to a man of fortune and consequence. This accession of reflected dignity brings on such a fit of good humour, that General Tilney does not recover from it till after the good, kind Eleanor has procured his forgiveness of her brother, and their father’s ungracious permission for Henry “to be a fool if he liked it.”

What renders Eleanor Tilney’s happiness more complete is, that it is the prosperous end of a course of true love which had not formerly run smooth; the lover having only recently and unexpectedly come into the title and fortune which so recommended the match to the General, that he had never “loved his daughter so well in all her hours of companionship, utility, and[Pg 196] patient endurance, as when he first hailed her ‘your ladyship.’”

Jane Austen adds with joy for Eleanor’s sake, that “her husband was really deserving of her, independent of his peerage, his wealth, and his attachment, being to a precision the most charming young man in the world.”

I must here point out another instance of Miss Austen’s thorough independence of precedent, and of the popular verdict in fiction. I think it is also a sign how true-hearted and unworldly she was herself in the main, under the class prejudices which she undoubtedly held, that she should, in the reasonableness which she so insisted upon, indicate how lightly within certain well-defined limits she valued the accidental advantages of rank and riches, in comparison with mutual affection, and mutual and moral affinity. To her, certainly,

“True hearts are more than coronets,
And simple faith than Norman blood,”
when she makes her heroine, whom she loves dearly, while she laughs at her from first to last, marry with all her will a simple country clergyman and younger son, while a secondary character in the story carries off the peer and charming fellow in one.[43]

I desire to call attention to this significant treatment of her heroine because, in dealing with General Tilney’s hectoring, grasping misdemeanours, though we are perfectly sensible that Jane Austen cordially despises the man, we are also conscious that his rank and position are made to throw a respectable cloak over his infirmities. Catherine is not caused to shrink from association with such a father-in-law, as she would have been represented shrinking from him, had he happened[Pg 197] to be a vulgar nobody, yet at the same time not more domineering, purse-proud, and mean than the well-born, well-educated General, with his oppressively artificial fine manners. Jane Austen was a born aristocrat, as she shows in many instances, but she was great enough to rise habitually above class weakness and narrowness.

The influence of the Viscount and Viscountess with General Tilney on the proscribed pair’s behalf is assisted by that right understanding of Mr. Morland’s circumstances which, as soon as the General will allow himself to be informed, they are qualified to give. “It taught him that he had been scarcely more misled by Thorpe’s first boast of the family wealth than by his subsequent malicious overthrow of it; that in no sense of the word were they necessitous or poor; and that Catherine would have three thousand pounds.”

This is a comfort, and so is the private intelligence which the calculating match-maker secures, that the Fullerton estate is at the disposal of the present proprietor, and therefore open to greedy speculation.

Accordingly, General Tilney permits his son to return to Northanger, “and thence made him the bearer of his consent, very courteously worded, in a page full of empty professions to Mr. Morland. The event which it authorised soon followed: Henry and Catherine were married, the bells rang, and everybody smiled; and as this took place within a twelvemonth from the first day of their meeting, it will not appear, after all the dreadful delays occasioned by the General’s cruelty, that they were essentially hurt by it.”

Jane Austen ends “Northanger Abbey,” as she began it, with a little paradoxical mocking comment, fitted to bewilder stupid people.

“To begin perfect happiness at the respective ages of twenty-six and eighteen is to do pretty well; and professing myself, moreover, convinced that the General’s unjust interference, so far from being really injurious to their felicity, was perhaps rather conducive to it,[Pg 198] by improving their knowledge of each other, and adding strength to their attachment, I leave it to be settled by whomsoever it may concern, whether the tendency of this work be altogether to recommend parental tyranny or reward filial disobedience.”[44]

Among the last things which Miss Austen did was to flatter the great public—unless, indeed, one considers that she paid it the highest compliment of all—by assuming it was a clever public, and must enjoy being made game of, to its face. A stupid public was not, and has never been, Jane Austen’s public. On such her fine sense and abounding humour, pervaded by the true refinement in which neither the woman nor the gentlewoman is for a moment forgotten, fall absolutely flat. I cannot conceive such a public, which is ordinarily fond of coarse, crude mental stimulants, as appreciating and enjoying Jane Austen, though her consummate art as a story-teller may beguile it into dozing over her pages, or hurrying through them. But there is such a thing as having a good taste cultivated and not perverted, and budding intelligence may be drawn out, not stultified.

To those who are not by mental constitution impelled altogether into the abnormal school of fiction—to those who can read between the lines—reading Jane Austen will always be studying under a wise teacher, and keenly relishing an exquisite treat.

In some respects “Northanger Abbey” is among the author’s masterpieces. It contains two or three of her most finished portraits. Nowhere is her writing more incisive, her epigrams neater, her wit at once drier and more sparkling.

But “Northanger Abbey” has also blemishes which are absent from other works by the same novelist. It lacks unity; it does not grow out of itself in close sequence, like “Emma.” Its different parts are so far inconsistent with each other, for strong realism and airy[Pg 199] burlesque do not match quite well together. There are considerable improbabilities in “Northanger Abbey”—above all, there is not a trace of the lurking pathos and pensive charm which blend with and relieve the humour of “Persuasion.”

On the contrary, the almost incessant banter of “Northanger Abbey,” excellent as it is in its way, has a certain hardness in it—perhaps, in this instance, the result of the unripe youth of the author—and possesses a tendency to fatigue and vex the reader who wishes to be serious for a moment—who regards the best of life and art as that which, in one fashion or another, reflects both life and art as serious and earnest.

decorative image

FOOTNOTES:
[18]Written in 1798. “Read Dickens’s ‘Hard Times,’ and another book of ‘Pliny’s Letters;’ read ‘Northanger Abbey,’ worth all Dickens and Pliny together, yet it was the work of a girl.”—Macaulay.

[19]Jane Austen may have had in her mind Mrs. Radcliffe’s heroines; to whom sketching from nature seems to have come by nature—who were all, as a matter of course, accomplished artists.

[20]Weymouth and Ramsgate, among sea-bathing places, seemed to rise most readily before her mind, though she alluded also to Southend and Cromer—not to say described Lyme—which she made her own.

[21]The fashion was a little absurd in its stateliness. Ladies were wont to wear nodding plumes of ostrich feathers, as at the Queen’s drawing-rooms, standing upright on the head, till they added a foot, at least, to the fair amazons’ height.

[22]Let us echo Henry Tilney’s praise of muslin. Will its simple, elegant, once wide reign never return? The prevalence of calico balls is a poor substitute for its sway.

[23]The old-fashioned term “quiz” was freely applied last century. It was originally associated with the first specimen of eye-glass, through which the short-sighted were supposed to quiz their neighbours. I should suppose Jane Austen must have been called a quiz in her day. The accusation was half coveted, half dreaded, according to the temper of the individual who incurred it.

[24]The remonstrance is still needed.

[25]Since these words were written we have had the whole of the “Waverley Novels,” not to mention more modern gains added to our wealth of excellent English works of fiction.

[26]There is this to be said for the sensational horrors which enchanted the girls of the last century, that these horrors, when founded on the model of Mrs. Radcliffe’s romances, were well principled, and free from inherent moral coarseness and license of tone.

[27]Perhaps the number of jilts in the last century have to do with spontaneous combustion where hearts were concerned.

[28]Some of the beautiful portraits of the last century (one, if I recollect rightly, which represents Mrs. Sheridan and her sister) give an idea how daintily becoming, how perfectly elegant, these muslin costumes could be.

[29]Wood and water always figure largely in Jane Austen’s landscapes.

[30]The furor about the “Mysteries of Udolpho,” in its day, was, indeed, not confined to school-girls. It extended over the whole reading world. It was European, as well as English.

[31]Such was the style of travelling en grand seigneur last century.

[32]What a quaint, pretty picture the young man in his coachman’s great-coat, the girl in her riding-habit and straw bonnet, which she is soon so anxious to protect from the rain, would make, taken as she stepped in or stepped out of Henry’s “curricle!”

[33]Even a good clergyman measured his duties differently last century.

[34]Mrs. Radcliffe, who appears to have been unable to stand a joke on her romances, even from their admirers, and who was much hurt by a laughing reference of Sir Walter Scott’s in “Waverley,” would have looked aghast at this levity.

[35]Revived mediævalism in æsthetics has changed all this, and gone far to banish again the garish light of day from “modern antique” houses.

[36]My impression is that Jane Austen began “Northanger Abbey” with the simple intention of executing, in accordance with an early amusement of hers, a gay parody on romances in general, and on one romance in particular. But her genius proved too much for her; and though she never entirely lost sight of her original design, she departed so far from it, by prolonging the Bath portion of the tale, as to destroy its unity, and make somewhat of a jumble of the whole book. On the other hand, the exercise of her great gifts, in their proper field of real life and character-drawing, has produced for us, instead of a clever burlesque for the amusement of contemporaries, a disjointed work of genius for the edification and enjoyment of succeeding generations.

[37]What a candid admission from a heroine, or from any girl! But to love flowers was not obligatory last century.

[38]Withal, one must be struck by Catherine’s unworldly disinterestedness. She has given her love to a son of the house; but in place of taking the opportunity to ascertain and exult over the Tilneys’ wealth and position, she is occupied with foolish romancing on her own account.

[39]I am able to conjecture, by the help of my own early studies, that Jane Austen is not foreseeing, and casting mockery on some modern sensational novels in this passage. She is simply borrowing from, and holding up to ridicule, a leading incident in the once popular romance of “The Children of the Abbey,” by Elizabeth Helme.

[40]If Jane Austen be right—and she was a great judge of human nature—in the implication that an eager, enthusiastic young reader is impelled to reproduce in personal experience what he or she reads, and if modern sensational novels come to be lived by our young men and women, where shall we look—how shall we answer for the wrong done by our idiotic, noxious, light literature?

[41]A period of time which would now suffice to take a traveller from London to Brussels with ease.

[42]The Morlands were “gentlefolks,” but that did not prevent all the fine stitching required by the family being done as a matter of course by the ladies.

[43]Concerning this gentleman, Jane Austen says, with one of her merry gibes, “I have only to add (aware that the rules of composition forbid the introduction of a character not connected with my fable) that this was the very gentleman whose negligent servant left behind him that collection of washing bills, resulting from a long visit to Northanger, by which my heroine was involved in one of her most alarming adventures.”

[44]But “Northanger Abbey” has another moral—a warning against romance run mad.

[Pg 200]

decorative image

EMMA.[45]
I.

MMA Woodhouse, whose Christian name supplies the title to the novel in which she figures as heroine, is one of Jane Austen’s lively, warm-hearted girls; but her personality is rendered quite distinct from that of Elizabeth Bennet by a thousand light yet significant touches. Emma’s circumstances alone would have sufficed, with the moulding power which such influences have in reality, and in the hands of a true artist, to shape her—always within certain limits—those of a well-principled, well-educated, essentially feminine girl, who is also a thorough lady, to different ends.

The novel of “Emma” is largely the record of the girl-heroine’s rash blunders and errors; but to me it is instructive and comforting to find the faults, with their impressive enough lessons, not only so girlish, but always within the region, I may say, of an innocent, upright, kindly, well-bred girl, whose many failings lean to virtue’s side. Emma Woodhouse is as incapable of deliberate undutifulness, dishonourable double-dealing, heartless levity, or disgraceful imprudence, and the coarse, evil-minded rubbing shoulders with vice, as[Pg 201] I not only earnestly hope, but fervently believe, every God-fearing, virtuous, loving girl in any rank, in any nation, is to this day, however impudently and wickedly she may be travestied in the lower literature of her country.

Emma Woodhouse, at twenty-one years of age, is at the head of her father’s comfortable, well-ordered establishment of Hartfield, in the village of Highbury, sixteen miles from London, where Emma’s elder sister Isabella, who has been married for several years, is settled.

The two sisters are the sole children of Mr. Woodhouse, who has been a widower since Emma was a child. But her dead mother’s place has been well supplied by an excellent governess, chaperon, and family friend. Miss Taylor, who marries and settles unexceptionably, with a worthy husband, in a country house at half a mile’s distance from Hartfield.

Emma is introduced to the reader on the afternoon of Miss Taylor’s wedding-day, left, for the first time in her life, to dine and spend a long evening with her father, a most amiable man, but a confirmed invalid, whose valetudinarian weaknesses and absurdities Jane Austen often makes irresistibly ridiculous—though all the time she treats him with larger-hearted, gentler consideration than is to be found in her manner of dealing with the foibles of the characters in “Pride and Prejudice,” and “Northanger Abbey;” for the very good reason that the authoress, when she wrote “Emma,” was no longer the brilliant, rather hard girl, but the mature merciful, woman. Between the writing of “Pride and Prejudice” and “Emma” she had learnt a grand lesson—the acquisition of which, though it cost the labour of a lifetime, would be well worth the time and trouble—that of tolerance: “to make allowance for us all,” which is not the mere result of a facile, careless temper, or a secret fellow-feeling with the offender in his offence, or a low moral standard, but is simply the widened sympathy and[Pg 202] deepened comprehension, both of the better Christian and the greater genius. Thus Mr. Woodhouse is respectable and lovable, in spite of his mild egotism and foolish hypochondria; while Miss Bates—one of the gems of the book—is still more winning in her singleness of heart and inexhaustible contentment and charity, along with her shallow simplicity, thorough humdrumness, and boundless garrulity.

While her father is taking his after-dinner nap Emma contemplates, a little ruefully, the prospect of many such tête-à-tête dinners and long evenings. Yet though Jane Austen tells us plainly that the real evils to which Emma is exposed consist of her having too much of her own way, and being slightly inclined to think too well of herself, she is full of tender reverence and care for her father, in deed even more than in word. All through their history she considers his well-being as the first thing, never hesitates to make sacrifices to ensure it, and caters for his entertainment with the anxious, womanly forethought of a much older and wiser person. In the same way, though it is distinctly a disadvantage and stumbling-block to Emma Woodhouse—not only that the Woodhouses are the persons of greatest consequence in their social circle, but that the circle over which Emma reigns, far too entirely for her own good, is composed of the most commonplace narrow elements that can be found in any village or country neighbourhood—and though Emma wearies of it, becomes impatient of it, is guilty of girlish ebullitions of fretting and fuming where her engagements and acquaintances are concerned—still she never once behaves with the absolute insolence, hardly with the superciliousness, of underbred, ungenerous, self-engrossed youth, exulting in its passing advantages, spurning at what it can see of the defects and infirmities of an older, perhaps more incapable, and illiterate generation, while it is blind in its ignorance to indemnifying stores of homely wisdom and experience.

The claims of hospitality are sacred to the girl, and[Pg 203] she is always not only a good woman, but a gentlewoman. We are sure that such vulgar, mean words as “old frumps” and “old tabbies” have never soiled Emma Woodhouse’s lips. Once she so far forgets herself as to prove guilty of being noisy and conspicuous at a picnic, and in the course of that indiscretion of publicly taking off and laughing at an old friend; but Emma does not require the sharp rebuke of the hero to be bitterly sorry for the offence, very much ashamed of it, and eagerly desirous to atone for it by all the kindness in her power.

On the evening of Miss Taylor’s wedding-day, Emma is striving to chat cheerfully with her father, who, fond of everybody he is used to, hates to part with any one of them, hates changes of every kind, and matrimony as the cause of change, and keeps speaking of the fortunate bride with uncalled-for compassion. “Poor Miss Taylor! I wish she were here again. What a pity it is that Mr. Weston ever thought of her!”

“I cannot agree with you, papa;” Emma tries to arrest his lamentations, and to put the step which has been taken in the pleasantest light, by dwelling on the excellence of Mr. Weston’s character and temper (Jane Austen is apt to bring forward temper as of cardinal importance), on Miss Taylor’s natural satisfaction in having a house of her own—for how often they will be going to see her and she will be coming to see them. They must begin, they must go and pay their wedding visit very soon.

“My dear, how am I to get so far?” objects plaintive Mr. Woodhouse. “Randall’s is such a distance, I could not walk half so far.”

“No, papa! nobody thought of your walking. We must go in the carriage, to be sure.”

“The carriage! But James will not like to put the horses to, for such a little way; and where are the poor horses to be, while we are paying our visit?”[46]

[Pg 204]

“They are to be put into Mr. Weston’s stables, papa. You know we have settled that already. We talked it all over with Mr. Weston last night. And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls, because of his daughter’s being housemaid there. I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else. That was your doing, papa. You got Hannah that good place. Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her—James is so obliged to you.”

Mr. Woodhouse’s kindness and innocent self-importance are equally gratified by being reminded of this good deed. He is enticed to expatiate on civil, pretty-spoken Hannah, for whom he has procured an advantageous place—not the least of its advantages in Mr. Woodhouse’s eyes being, that when James goes over to see his daughter, he will carry her news of the family at Hartfield.

Emma spares no exertions to encourage the happier train of thought, and by the help of backgammon is sanguine about getting her father tolerably through the evening, when a frequent visitor, another near neighbour, walks in, and renders the backgammon-table unnecessary.

“Mr. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight and thirty, was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but connected with it as the elder brother of Isabella Woodhouse’s husband.”

Did ever hero enter more unassumingly on the scene? Was ever even the merest walking gentleman more succinctly or prosaically described? And yet George Knightley is a very hero of heroes, far in advance of Darcy in “Pride and Prejudice” where the highest manliness and generosity of character are in question.

I shall only pause a moment to remark that Jane Austen, in depriving Mr. Knightley of the bloom of youth, goes in the teeth of contemporary standards of age to which she herself paid deference in “Sense and[Pg 205] Sensibility,” when she made Marianne Dashwood regard Colonel Brandon—a contemporary of Mr. Knightley’s—as quite an old man, fitted for flannel vests and rheumatism.

To Mr. Knightley Emma starts an idea which has taken possession of her susceptible imagination, and which has a considerable influence on her later conduct.

“I made the match, you know, four years ago,” she says triumphantly, in allusion to the topic of the day. “To have it take place, and be proved in the right when so many people said Mr. Weston would never marry again, may comfort me for anything.”

Mr. Knightley shakes his head at her. He has known her from infancy, seen her grow up with all that is charming in her, only slightly spoilt. He has more than an old friend’s regard for her, but he is also one of the few persons among her friends who sees her faults, and tells her of them—a process not particularly agreeable to Emma, and still more distasteful to her doting father; so that she has to assert stoutly, as if she liked the censure, “Mr. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know, in a joke, only in a joke. We always say what we like to each other.”

In defiance of Mr. Knightley’s shake of the head—indeed, spurred on by it—Emma insists that she arranged the match from the day Mr. Weston gallantly went and borrowed two umbrellas from Farmer Mitchell’s, and brought them to her and Miss Taylor when it began to drizzle in Broadway Lane. Emma boasts of the success of her scheme, and laughingly announces herself a future match-maker.

She does not go unchallenged by Mr. Knightley.

“I do not know what you mean by ‘success,’” he says, and observes, with brotherly bluntness and irony, that her time has been properly and delicately spent if she has been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about a marriage—a worthy employment for a young lady’s mind. Then he treats her pretensions[Pg 206] with smiling scorn, and alleges she made a lucky guess, which is all that can be said.

Emma argues that she promoted Mr. Weston’s visits to Hartfield, and when her father begs in all sincerity that she will make no more matches, craves mischievously to be allowed one exception. “Only one more, papa, only for Mr. Elton. Poor Mr. Elton!—you like Mr. Elton, papa—I must look about for a wife for him. He has been here a whole year, and he has fitted up his house so comfortably that it would be a shame to have him single any longer; and I thought when he was joining their hands to-day, he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him! I think very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way of doing him service.”

“Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken,” said Mr. Knightley, “but leave him to choose his own wife. Depend upon it, a man of six or seven and twenty can take care of himself.”

My readers will observe that Emma is as disengaged and disinterested in making matches for her friends as if she were a young matron. She has not a notion of the incumbency of marriage on herself, as even Jane and Elizabeth Bennet felt it, to a certain extent, to be an obligation on them. There is no worldly necessity for it in Emma’s case. She is the independent mistress of Hartfield, at the head of her indulgent father’s establishment, and amply provided for in the future. Jane Austen’s women, as a rule, are not too susceptible. Love and marriage for themselves are not the beginning, middle, and end of their dreams. They are quite willing to grant due prominence to other influences and interests. They would have blushed to have been engrossed by one passion, however lawful—even honourable. It is only because Catherine Morland is very young and simple that she is so entranced by Henry Tilney’s attentions. As it is, had the couple been finally separated, she would have submitted to the inevitable,[Pg 207] and been content in time without him. Fanny Price’s devotion to her cousin Edmund is the habit of many years, and is largely made up of gratitude for constant protection and kindness. When Edmund Bertram’s marriage to Mary Crawford appears certain, and when Henry Crawford is wooing Fanny with manly ardour and tender consideration for her difficulties, she is in a fair way—Jane Austen does not conceal it—for transferring her gentle affections from Edmund to Henry. The author’s older women are fine, sensible creatures, capable of being useful and happy in all the relations of life. They can love, with what unselfish fidelity after hope is gone, Anne Elliot shows; but they are always mistresses of themselves, never love-sick—the poor puppets and slaves of passion.

Mr. Weston, Miss Taylor’s husband, has been a widower like Mr. Woodhouse, and his son by the first wife is destined to play a prominent part in the story. Frank Churchill has been early adopted by a wealthy, childless uncle and aunt—his mother’s relations—who give him their name, and are to make him their heir. He has been seldom seen in Highbury, but his praises have gone before him, and it does not diminish his popularity that he writes “a very handsome letter” to his stepmother, though he is not able to pay her a visit.

Within the round of Hartfield visiting—abridged, as it is, by Mr. Woodhouse’s delicate health and invalid habits—are Donwell Abbey,[47] Mr. Knightley’s seat; the vicarage occupied by the young bachelor clergyman, Mr. Elton; the houses in the village which belong respectively to Mr. and Mrs. Perry, the country doctor and his wife; Mrs. Bates, the widow of the late vicar, and her daughter; and Mrs. Goddard, who was the mistress of a school—not a seminary.

Jane Austen gives her view of the education of the period, which was in a transition state, in her definition of a school as distinguished from a seminary—not “an[Pg 208] establishment, or anything which professed, in long sentences of refined nonsense, to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality, upon new principles and new systems, and where young ladies, for enormous pay, might be screwed out of health and into vanity—but a real, honest, old-fashioned boarding-school, where a reasonable quantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable price, and where girls might be sent to be out of the way, and scramble themselves into a little education, without any danger of coming back prodigies.” These views were regarded as eminently sensible, moderate, and practical in their day; and no doubt there was, and is, some truth in them. At the same time, the general notion of education is narrow and prejudiced, to be held by so able a woman.

Mr. Woodhouse’s habits make him go abroad rarely, but he is fond of company in a quiet way at home, and Emma finds such company is best secured in the form of “tea visits” from such accommodating old neighbours as the Bateses and Mrs. Goddard. She is delighted to see her father look comfortable, and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well; but the prosings of the elderly and homely guests do not prove very congenial entertainment for the bright, clever young girl. Therefore she welcomes Mrs. Goddard’s respectful request to be allowed to bring a parlour boarder,[48] Miss Smith, with her.

Harriet Smith is a plump, blooming, blue-eyed, sweet-tempered girl, whose beauty delights Emma’s eye, while her innocent deference and gratitude, together with her unqualified admiration for everything at Hartfield—including its young mistress—touch Emma’s heart and flatter her vanity. She determines, in modern parlance, to “cultivate” Harriet Smith, who is to a great extent friendless, to improve her, to raise her into better society, and to make a companion of her.

[Pg 209]

Emma does not scruple to propose detaching the girl from the only friends she has—a farmer’s family named Martin. Some of the daughters had been school-fellows of Harriet’s at Mrs. Goddard’s, and they and their mother and brother had been kind to her. These Martins are tenants of Mr. Knightley at the Abbey Mill Farm, and Emma knows that he thinks highly of them; but in her youthful aristocratic fashion she leaps to the conclusion that, from their rank in life, they must be coarse and unpolished. She will be doing a good deed to separate Harriet from her former allies, to whom the girl is so superior. It will be a delightful and praise-worthy task to improve and introduce into Emma’s world this very pretty, modest young creature, who is, of course, to look up to her benefactress and attach herself closely to her.

There is a comical, often-quoted contretemps constantly occurring at these parties of Emma’s. They usually end with suppers,[49] in which such little delicacies as minced chicken and scalloped oysters, carefully provided by the young hostess, are peculiarly acceptable to the guests, whose narrow incomes for the most part necessitate frugal living. But though poor Mr. Woodhouse would have made his guests welcome to anything and everything, his care for their health, in an egotistical reflection of his own experience, causes him to grieve that they will eat. “He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his youth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see anything put upon it. Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he could with thorough self-approbation recommend, though he might constrain himself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing away the nicer things, to say—

“‘Mrs. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs? An egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome. Serle understands boiling an egg better[Pg 210] than anybody; I would not recommend an egg boiled by anybody else. But you need not be afraid; they are very small, you see; one of our small eggs will not hurt you. Miss Bates, let Emma help you to a little bit of tart—a very little bit. Ours are all apple-tarts. You need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here. I do not advise the custard. Mrs. Goddard, what say you to half a glass of wine?—a small half-glass put into a tumbler of water? I do not think it could disagree with you.’”

Imagine the dilemma of the poor, baulked ladies, with their healthy appetites and the little treats laid before them, while the guests could hardly refuse the well-meant advice of the host.

But Emma comes to the rescue, allows her father to talk, but supplies the wants of her company in a much more satisfactory style. She is never indifferent to doing the honours of her father’s house “well and attentively.” Well-bred girls of Emma Woodhouse’s era would in her position have felt ashamed to be found “mooning” and self-absorbed, destitute of any sense of responsibility and thought for others. Nobody then described selfishness with enthusiasm, as an irresistible charm and crowning merit.

Harriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield is soon a settled thing. Emma does nothing by halves. As for the simple, docile girl whom Emma has taken up, Harriet is only too proud and pleased to be thus distinguished by the beautiful, “elegant” Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield.

Emma amuses herself by encouraging Harriet’s prattle, which, when it forsakes school-life, runs persistently on the two months’ holiday she had spent with the Martins at Abbey Mill Farm. At first Harriet is in blissful ignorance of the social inferiority of the Farm, and talks with exultation of the two parlours—one of them quite as large as Mrs. Goddard’s drawing-room; the upper maid, who had lived five-and-twenty years with Mrs. Martin; the eight cows—one of[Pg 211] them a little Welsh cow, a very pretty little Welsh cow, of which Harriet had been so fond Mrs. Martin had said it should be called her cow; and the handsome summer-house in the garden, in which, some day next year, they are all to drink tea. And Harriet, after a little encouragement, shows no dislike to talk of the young farmer who is the master of the house. He has shared in the moonlight walks and merry games of his sisters and their friend. “He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts because she had said how fond she was of them, and in everything else he was so very obliging. He had his shepherd’s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her. She was very fond of singing. He could sing a little himself. She believed he was very clever, and understood everything. He had a very fine flock, and while she was with them he had been bid more for his wool than anybody in the county. She believed everybody spoke well of him. His mother and sisters were very fond of him. Mrs. Martin had told her one day (there was a blush as she said it) that it was impossible for anybody to be a better son, and therefore she was sure whenever he married, he would make a good husband. Not that she wanted him to marry. She was in no hurry at all.”

“Well done, Mrs. Martin,” thought Emma; “you know what you are about.”

“And when she had come away Mrs. Martin was so very kind as to send Mrs. Goddard a beautiful goose—the finest goose Mrs. Goddard had ever seen. Mrs. Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the three teachers—Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson—to sup with her.”

“Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line of his own business. He does not read?”

“Oh, yes—that is, no—I do not know, but I believe he has read a good deal, but not what you would think anything of. He reads the agricultural reports,[Pg 212] and some other books that lie in one of the window-seats, but he reads all them to himself. But sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of ‘Elegant Extracts,’ very entertaining. And I know he has read the ‘Vicar of Wakefield.’ He never read the ‘Romance of the Forest,’ nor ‘The Children of the Abbey.’ He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them, but he is determined to get them now, as soon as ever he can.”

Emma sets herself to change all these cordial relations with the Martins, above all the appreciation of young Martin, in which she sees special danger for her protégée.

Emma begins by gently “setting down” Harriet as to the position of yeomen, and the improbability of her—Emma Woodhouse—having noticed one of them, since Harriet supposes Miss Woodhouse must have seen and known Robert Martin when he rode to market. On the occasion of an accidental encounter between the young farmer and the two girls, Emma takes care to let Harriet perceive that she thinks the young man very plain and clownish in his air. Emma makes Harriet contrast his lack of “gentility”—which, by the way, was not so odious a word last century—with the well-bred manners of Mr. Elton, among others of their acquaintance.

In fact, it is for the young vicar that Emma destines her friend; and in order to bring about an attachment and marriage, which she considers will be advantageous to both, Emma encourages Mr. Elton to spend many of his disengaged evenings at Hartfield, where she has always Harriet Smith with her. The young mistress of the house is altogether oblivious of the fact that the gentleman who, though well enough disposed, is by no means without self-love, and a head which is liable to be turned, may altogether mistake her graciousness.

Mr. Knightley does not approve of the great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith. There is no[Pg 213] use in Mrs. Weston, Emma’s attached old friend, urging that it may induce Emma to read more; as she wishes to see Harriet better informed, the girls will read together.

“Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old. I have seen a great many lists of her drawing up, at various times, of books that she meant to read regularly through—and very good lists they were, very well chosen, and neatly arranged—sometimes alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. The list she drew up when only fourteen, I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit, that I preserved it some time, and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now. But I have done with expecting a course of steady reading from Emma.”

Mr. Knightley adds his estimate of the pretty, popular girl. “Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest of her family. At ten years’ old she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen. She was always quick and assured, Isabella slow and diffident. And ever since she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house, and of you all.”

He inveighs against the unsuitable friendship between Emma and Harriet Smith, as sure to be injurious to both. Harriet is an unconscious flatterer. Her ignorance is in itself hourly flattery. On the other hand, Hartfield will put Harriet out of conceit with her natural sphere. She will only grow refined enough to be uncomfortable among the people with whom her lot is cast.

In the middle of their argument, the two friends break off the dispute to agree in their affectionate admiration of Emma’s person. Here is a graphic and charming picture of the heroine, which removes her attractions far out of the category of what is sickly and fantastic:—“Such an eye! the true hazel eye—and so brilliant! regular features, open countenance, with a complexion—oh, what a bloom of full health! and such a pretty height and size! such a firm and upright figure! There is health not merely in her bloom, but[Pg 214] in her air, her head, her glance. One hears something of a child’s being ‘the picture of health;’ now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of grown-up health.”

Yes, indeed, that is what every girl—plain or handsome, should desire to be, for her own good and that of all connected with her. In a summary of the bountiful gifts bestowed on the late Catherine Tait, wife of the Archbishop of Canterbury, what were reckoned as not the least were the health and strength, beyond those of ordinary women, which fitted her for the worthy performance of her many and arduous duties. Will girls never lay the lesson to heart in time, before they so often fritter and fling away, by culpable neglect and recklessness, one of God’s greatest boons?

Mr. Knightley returns to the charge of the mischievous association of the girls, until he stirs up Mrs. Weston to protest, with regard to Emma: “Where shall we see a better daughter, a kinder sister, a truer friend?”

“Very well,” he answers, “I will not plague you any more. Emma shall be an angel, and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella. John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection; and Isabella always thinks as he does, except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children. I am sure of having their opinions with me.”

“I have a very sincere interest in Emma,” Mr. Knightley repeats. “Isabella does not seem more my sister; has never excited a greater interest; perhaps, hardly so great. There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one feels for Emma. I wonder what will become of her?”

“So do I,” said Mrs. Weston gently, “very much.”

“She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means just nothing at all. But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man she cared for. It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in[Pg 215] love, with a proper object. I should like to see Emma in love, and in some doubt of a return; it would do her good. But there is nobody hereabouts to attract her; and she goes so seldom from home.”

“There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her resolution at present,” says Mrs. Weston, “as can well be.”

The truth is, Mrs. Weston and her husband have a pet plan for their favourite Emma, which is not to be disclosed prematurely.

Emma paints Harriet’s miniature, and Mr. Elton lends all the help of his advice, while complimenting Miss Woodhouse on her talent for drawing, which she regards as his gratitude on Harriet’s account.

Emma takes care to fix upon Mr. Elton as the person with whom she can entrust her little picture to be conveyed to London and framed; while he shows a sufficient sense of her confidence. “He will suit Harriet exactly,” reflects Emma, complacently; “but he does sigh, and languish, and study for compliments, rather more than I could endure as a principal.”

In the meantime, Harriet receives a direct proposal of marriage from young Martin, couched in manly, unaffected terms.

Poor little Harriet, who is really as guileless and kind-hearted as she is simple and silly, is at first much and favourably impressed.

But Emma’s influence, though she does not mean to exercise it unduly, causes Harriet, not without lingering regret, to resolve to decline the offer.

“I could not have visited Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey Mill Farm,” says Emma, and Harriet is fixed in her resolve.

“That would have been too dreadful, dear Miss Woodhouse. I would not give up the pleasure and honour of being acquainted with you, for anything in the world.”

Mr. Knightley comes in a happy mood to Hartfield, to tell Emma something that will please her about[Pg 216] her little friend, Harriet Smith. Though he has condemned the friendship, he can appreciate Harriet’s girlish good qualities; he is even magnanimous enough to compliment Emma on having cured her companion of her school-girl giggle. Robert Martin has confided his attachment to his friend and landlord, who is eager to inform Emma that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage from a most unexceptionable quarter—Robert Martin is the man. Her visit to Abbey Mill in the summer has done his business, and he means to marry her.

“He is very obliging,” said the well-informed Emma; “but is he sure that Harriet means to marry him?”

“Well, well—means to make her an offer, then; will that do?” Mr. Knightley, “who had nothing of ceremony about him,” conceives that Emma is speaking from some scruple of womanly dignity as to his mode of expressing himself. He enlarges on the advantages of the marriage, and his satisfaction with it. He ends with the laughing supposition that Martin may be detaining Harriet in Highbury at that very moment, and she may not be thinking him one of those “tiresome wretches”—as Emma has just styled the Highbury gossips.

“Pray, Mr. Knightley,” said Emma, who has been smiling to herself, “how do you know that Mr. Martin did not speak yesterday?”

Certainly he did not absolutely know, but he had understood Harriet Smith was with her all that day.

“Come,” said she, “I will tell you something in return for what you have told me. He did speak yesterday; that is, he wrote, and was refused.”

Mr. Knightley is incredulous and indignant. At last he accuses Emma, with reason, as the moving spirit in the step Harriet has taken. “You have been no friend to Harriet Smith, Emma,” he said; and with equal sense and sincerity he contrasts Harriet with Robert Martin, to the advantage of the latter, and[Pg 217] remarks how happy the girl had been among the Martins, till Emma’s injudicious interference.

In the hot argument which ensues, Mr. Knightley takes occasion to tell Emma that if she intends to make a match between Elton and Harriet, her labour will be in vain.

Emma laughs and disclaims.

But Mr. Knightley’s penetration is not to be baffled, and he goes on to assure her Elton will not do. He is a good sort of young man, and a respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make an imprudent marriage.

It is Emma’s turn to be incredulous, though she will not admit her intentions.

The two part in mutual vexation, which causes a coolness between them for weeks.

Emma’s pride is now piqued to accomplish her design; her head gets so full of it, that she is ill-judged enough to let Harriet see what she wishes and expects, and actually talks the foolish girl—who is, at least, perfectly unassuming—into a persuasion that she has inspired Mr. Elton with a passion for her, the belief in which is more than sufficient to create an answering passion in Harriet’s soft, childish heart.

We have next an example of an old favourite employment with girls. Instead of the reading, which never went beyond a few chapters, the only literary pursuit which engages Harriet, and in which Emma, too, takes an interest, the only mental provision she is making for the evening of life,[50] is the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort she can come across.

These were days when, in gatherings of young people even a little above Harriet in rank and education, the company in cropped hair and white frocks, in Brutuses and high-necked, short-waisted coats, played at such ingenious games as “The Traveller,” and circulated[Pg 218] riddles for the general entertainment. A new riddle was quite a precious possession to a girl, nearly as good as a new song.

Miss Nash, Mrs. Goddard’s head teacher, had written out as many as three hundred riddles, and Harriet hopes to have more.

Mr. Woodhouse is almost as much interested in the work as the girls, and tries in vain to revive old recollections of the excellent riddles of his youth, which always end in

“Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.”
Mr. Elton, who is constantly with the girls, is induced to furnish a riddle of his own composition—though, with the bashfulness of incipient authorship, he passes it off as a charade which a friend of his has addressed to a young lady, the object of his admiration—and he is gone the next moment. The charade is as follows:—

“My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease;
Another view of man my second brings,
Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!
“But, ah! united what reverse we have,
Man’s boasted power and freedom all are flown;
Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
“Thy ready wit the word will soon supply,
May its approval beam in that soft eye!”
Emma reads, ponders, catches the meaning “courtship,” and happily confident that Mr. Elton, is coming to the point, hands the paper to Harriet.

“‘That soft eye’ can only refer to Harriet,” thinks Emma. “‘Thy ready wit.’ Humph! Harriet’s ready wit! All the better. A man must be very much in love to describe her so.”

Harriet’s ready wit exhibits itself in not having an idea of the answer. Can it be “Woman,” or “Neptune,” or “Trident?”

[Pg 219]

Emma is slightly exasperated; but she takes pains to explain the riddle in detail, and to draw the strongest inferences from its subject, while Harriet beams and blushes with joy and confusion.

Emma now becomes as assiduous as ever Mrs. Bennet, of Longbourn House, showed herself with regard to her daughter, Jane, and her lover Bingley, in making opportunities for Mr. Elton to propose to Harriet Smith.

But lovers are perverse, and will not always avail themselves of the best-planned assistance.

In the course of a walk which Emma and Harriet chance to take past the vicarage, in which the girls are overtaken by the vicar, Emma, having discovered that Harriet had never been inside the house, perpetrates a ruse to enable her friend to see her future home. Emma contrives to break her boot-lace, then announces the accident, and asks Mr. Elton to allow her to go into the vicarage and get a bit of riband or string from his housekeeper to keep the boot on.

Mr. Elton looks all happiness, and is as alert in conducting the ladies to his house as can be wished. But though Emma retires with the housekeeper, and stays as long away as she can manage, she finds on her return that the two standing together at one of the windows, however friendly, are not yet an engaged couple.

Christmas brings Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley and their children to enliven Hartfield.

Mrs. John Knightley is a pretty, elegant little woman, gentle and quiet, wrapt up in her family—a devoted wife, a doting mother, and so tenderly attached to her father and sister, that but for those higher ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible. She has inherited her father’s delicate constitution, is over-careful of her children, has many fears and nerves, and is as fond of her own doctor in town as her father can be of his Mr. Perry.

Mr. John Knightley is tall, gentlemanlike, very[Pg 220] clever, a rising barrister. He is domestic and estimable in private life. But he has a cold, dry manner, and he is capable of being sometimes out of humour. He has all the mental clearness and quickness his wife lacks, and he can on occasions act an ungracious, or say a severe thing. He is not a great favourite with his sister-in-law. She is quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella which Isabella never feels for herself. Perhaps Emma might have passed over more, had his manners been more flattering to Isabella’s sister; but they are only those of a calmly kind brother and friend. However, his chief offence is, now and then, a want of forbearance with Mr. Woodhouse’s peculiarities and fidgetiness. Mr. John Knightley has really a great regard for his father-in-law, but sometimes the younger man cannot resist delivering a rational remonstrance, or a sharp retort equally ill-bestowed. It does not often happen, but it occurs too frequently for Emma’s charity.

Though such collisions do not usually take place early in the Knightleys’ visits, one is brought about on the very evening of John Knightley and his wife’s arrival.

Mr. Woodhouse and Isabella are very happy, expatiating on the merits of a basin of nice, smooth gruel—thin, but not too thin—and exchanging their little valetudinarian confidences, when, unfortunately, a reference is made to Mrs. Knightley’s last sea-bathing experience at Southend, seeing that the two great medical authorities of the father and daughter—Perry and Wingfield—differ on the respective recommendations of Southend and Cromer.

“Southend is an unhealthy place,” Mr. Woodhouse harps. “Perry was surprised to hear you had fixed on Southend.”

“We had all our health perfectly well there,” Isabella defends her side of the question. “Mr. Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy. I am sure he may be depended upon, for he thoroughly understands the nature of the[Pg 221] air. His own brother and family have been there repeatedly.”

“You should have gone to Cromer, my dear,” insists Mr. Woodhouse. “Perry was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best of all the sea-bathing places. Better not move at all, better stay in London altogether, than travel forty miles to get into a worse air. That is just what Perry said. It seemed to him a very ill-judged measure.”

John Knightley is able to stand this no longer. “Mr. Perry,” he said, “would do well to keep his opinion till it is asked for. I may be allowed, I hope, the use of my judgment as well as Mr. Perry. I want his directions no more than his drugs.” Then, more coolly, “If Mr. Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children a distance of a hundred and thirty miles, with no greater expense and inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as willing to prefer Cromer to Southend, as he could be himself.”

“True, true,” said George Knightley, hastily changing the subject, and warding off further danger, as Emma is accustomed to do. Still, Mr. Woodhouse is rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his friend Perry—to whom he has, in fact, though unconsciously, been attributing many of his own feelings and expressions, Jane Austen adds with a masterly touch—so that it requires all the soothing attentions of his daughters to set him at ease again.

Mr. Knightley of Donwell Abbey had joined the family at dinner. Emma had recognised his right to do so, and she had hoped that they might be friends again, for it was time their disagreement should end. She trusted their nephews and nieces would serve as a bond of union, and help in the peace-making. Accordingly, when he found her with the youngest, a child of eight months, in her arms, though he looked grave, and spoke shortly to begin with, he soon took the child out of her arms, with the unceremoniousness of restored amity.

[Pg 222]

The conviction gave Emma first satisfaction, and then a temptation to sauciness. It was a comfort they thought alike on their nephews and nieces, she said.

He was not unwilling to renew the old discussions half-banteringly, acquiescing in the mock humility of her assertion that, in their differences, she must always be in the wrong. Yes, and reason good, he said; he was sixteen years old when she was born, and he had the advantage of not being a pretty woman and a spoilt child. But “tell your aunt, little Emma, that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances.”

“I only want to know,” said Emma, “that Mr. Martin is not very, very bitterly disappointed.”

“A man cannot be more so,” was his short, full answer.

“Ah! indeed, I am very sorry,” Emma made the penitent acknowledgment; “come, shake hands with me.”

This ceremony had just taken place with great cordiality, when John Knightley made his appearance, and “How d’ye do, George?” and “John, how are you?” succeeded in the true English style (which has not warmed much in the course of nearly another century), burying under a calmness that seemed all but indifference the real attachment which would have led either of them, if requisite, to do everything for the good of the other.

There could not be a happier creature than Mrs. John Knightley in her visit to Hartfield, going about every morning among her old acquaintances, with her five children, and talking every evening over what she had done with her father and sister.

The animation of the Knightleys’ visit nerves Mr. Woodhouse to the exertion of dining out with them at Randalls; where Mr. and Mrs. Weston consult his comfort in every respect, by fixing an early dinner-hour, and limiting their invited guests to his family and particular set, including the elder Mr. Knightley, Mr. Elton, and Harriet Smith.

[Pg 223]

The incidents in connection with this dinner-party furnish a strange and unwelcome revelation to Emma’s mind. In the first place, Harriet is attacked by a feverish sore-throat, and cannot form one of the party. Emma considers that Mr. Elton ought to make an excuse to be absent also—in fact, she is so obliging as to furnish him with one. She complains of the coldness of the weather,—wonders how any one would dine out who could help it. She and her father cannot disappoint the Westons, but there is no such obligation on Mr. Elton. She detects some hoarseness in his voice already. With the duties of next day—Sunday—before him, she thinks it would be no more than common prudence in him to stay at home and take care of himself.

Mr. Elton looks as if he did not know what to answer. He is not accustomed to contradict a lady, especially when her anxiety for his welfare is of the most gratifying description. But the next moment, a little to her disgust, Emma hears him accept with alacrity an offer from John Knightley, to secure him from any exposure to the weather by giving him a seat in their carriage.

The second shock to Emma is John Knightley’s hinting that Mr. Elton’s exaggerated efforts to please ladies, culminate in his desire to oblige Emma.

She laughs the idea to scorn; still, as coming from a man of her brother-in-law’s judgment and penetration, it annoys her.

There is additional discomposure in her drive in company with John Knightley and Mr. Elton, while her father and Isabella occupy the other carriage, to Randalls. Mr. Elton is in exasperatingly good spirits, in spite of the tidings which Emma takes care to convey to him, that there is no abatement in Harriet’s indisposition. He outdoes himself in blandness. John Knightley, on the contrary, indulges in a fit of ill-humour at being dragged from the hearth-rug at Hartfield and his children’s company at dessert, and[Pg 224] growls in the most approved fashion over the folly of dining out, the whole way between Hartfield and Randalls—Emma being unable to afford him the sedative of “Very true, my love!” which, no doubt, is administered by his usual travelling companion.

Mr. Elton’s happy countenance and solicitous attentions haunt Emma all the evening, spoiling her pleasure, frightening her with the remembrance of John Knightley’s view of the case, which she herself defines as “absurd and insufferable.” In the drawing-room she is still farther offended by Mr. Elton’s asking her to promise him not to expose herself to infection in visiting Harriet Smith, and calling upon Mrs. Weston to support him in his entreaty. “So scrupulous for others, so careless of herself. She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day, and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore-throat herself? Is that fair, Mrs. Weston? Judge between us.” Well might Mrs. Weston look surprised, and Emma feel too much provoked to be able to answer him.

John Knightley comes into the room with a cool report that it is snowing hard, and a caustic congratulation of poor Mr. Woodhouse’s spirit in venturing out with his carriage and horses in such weather.

Jolly Mr. Weston wishes that the roads may become impassable, to keep them all at Randalls.

Mr. Woodhouse and his elder daughter are in consternation. How can the chronic invalid face being overturned on the common, or the fond mother consent to be blocked up, for days and nights, from her children? (The country roads of last century were less trustworthy than those of to-day.)

Helpful George Knightley comes back from walking down the sweep and along Highbury Road, with the comforting assurance that matters are not nearly so bad as his brother and Mr. Weston have supposed. In some cases the ground is hardly white, and both of the coachmen agree there is no real difficulty.

[Pg 225]

Everybody is in a hurry to get off, and by John Knightley’s forgetfulness in following his wife into her father’s carriage, Emma finds herself, to her dismay, in the Knightleys’ carriage, alone with Mr. Elton. She believes that he has drunk too much of the Westons’ good wine,[51] and will want to talk nonsense. To restrain him, she prepares to speak with exquisite calmness of the weather; but scarcely has she begun, scarcely have they passed the gate, when she finds Mr. Elton actually and unmistakably making violent love to her.

Emma clings to the refuge of thinking her companion half intoxicated; disgraceful as the excuse is—above all in a clergyman—it was not altogether unwarranted by the lax practices of the time.

But Mr. Elton has only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not at all to confuse his intellect. Emma, in her trepidation and vexation, strives to parry his addresses and to recall him to his senses, by an attempt at playful reproach. “I am very much astonished, Mr. Elton. This to me! You take me for my friend. Any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver.”

But Mr. Elton repeats, with undaunted assurance and a great show of amazement, “Message to Miss Smith!” what can she possibly mean?

“Mr. Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct,” cries the distressed Emma. “You are not yourself; say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it.”

Far from it, Mr. Elton resumes the subject of his passion, and presses for a favourable answer.

As Emma’s notion of his inebriety yields to a conviction of his inconsistency and presumption, she speaks with fewer struggles for politeness; but her indignation is principally directed against what she declares is the contrast between his behaviour to Miss Smith during the last month—what she has herself witnessed, of his daily attentions,—and his present most unwarrantable[Pg 226] profession of love to herself, which is far, indeed, from affording her gratification.

“Good Heavens!” cries Mr. Elton, “what can be the meaning of this? Miss Smith—I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of my existence; never paid her any attentions but as your friend; never cared whether she were dead or alive but as your friend.”

This is plain speaking from the compliment-paying Mr. Elton; but worse is to come.

“Miss Smith, indeed! Oh! Miss Woodhouse, who can think of Miss Smith when Miss Woodhouse is near? No!” in accents meant to be insinuating, “I am sure you have seen and understood me.”

It has all been a miserable mistake, in the course of which Emma has not only grossly misled poor, foolish little Harriet, Emma has also fed with false hopes the conceit and interested motives—rather than the honest regard—of a vain, ambitious man, who has been seeking wealth and worldly position as the first recommendations in a wife.

Emma is struck dumb, and when she says nothing her silence is still farther misinterpreted.

“Charming Miss Woodhouse, allow me to interpret this interesting silence. It confesses that you have long understood me.”

Then Emma finds her voice: “No, sir, it confesses no such thing.”

She tells him again in no measured terms how completely she has misunderstood him. Shaken and staggered as she is by his behaviour, she still goes back to her persuasion of his attachment to Miss Smith. Does he mean to say he has never thought seriously of her?

“Never,” cries Elton, affronted in his turn. “I think seriously of Miss Smith! Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl, and I should be happy to see her respectably settled. I wish her extremely well, and, no doubt, there are men who would not object to——Everybody has their own level; but as for myself, I am not, I think, quite so much at a loss, I need not so[Pg 227] totally despair of an equal alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith.”

The smallness of Mr. Elton’s nature is betrayed in his manner of speaking of Harriet at this time, as well as in many of his subsequent actions. He is not a fool—at least, not where men are concerned, like Mr. Collins in “Pride and Prejudice.” Mr. Elton is altogether a better-bred man. But in this last specimen of a clergyman who is at once a coxcomb and a fortune-hunter, Jane Austen deals another blow at parsonolatry. One must think of Henry Tilney, Edward Ferrars, and Edmund Bertram, to understand how heartily she respected her father’s cloth when it was worthily worn.

Mr. Elton is almost as obstinate as Emma, and hardly more flattering in reminding her of the encouragement he has received.

“Encouragement!” cries Emma, insulted by the word. “I gave you no encouragement, sir; you have been entirely mistaken in supposing it. I have seen you only as the admirer of my friend. In no other light could you have been more to me than a common acquaintance.”

“He was too angry to say another word, her manner too decided to invite supplication, and in this state of swelling resentment and mutually deep mortification they had to continue together a few minutes longer, for the fears of Mr. Woodhouse had confined them to a foot pace. If there had not been so much anger there would have been desperate awkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment. Without knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane or when it stopped, they found themselves, all at once, at the door of his house; and he was out before another syllable passed. Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good night. The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly; and under indescribable irritation of spirits she was then conveyed to Hartfield.”

It is a wretched business, Emma decides when she[Pg 228] has retired for the night, and her maid has curled her hair—in those days of curls—and she is left alone with full opportunity for the unpleasant operation of thinking. Such a blow for Harriet! That is the worst of all. Emma’s conscience and heart are in the right place, though her wilfulness and self-confidence may carry her away; so her first thought is, “If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could have borne anything. He might have doubled his presumption to me—but poor Harriet!”

Emma cannot spare any pity for Mr. Elton’s disappointment. She has never been personally vain, as George Knightley noted, and she is shrewd enough to comprehend the kind of attraction of Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield, and her thirty thousand pounds, to Mr. Elton, the vicar of Highbury, without any connections to speak of, with only a moderate income, and nothing but his situation and civility to recommend him. She feels inclined at first to accuse him of double dealing in his manner towards Harriet and herself; and it is hard for her to be dislodged from the most sincere conviction that she has lent his forward advances to intimacy with herself, and his delusion as to her partiality to him, no encouragement.

But Emma’s honesty is too great for her and her present peace. On looking back, she cannot help seeing how many incidents in connection with the miniature, his charade, &c., might have had a double significance. How far her own fancy had coloured looks and words; how much the wish had been father to the thought! Then, when she passes in review before her, her own constant invitations to Mr. Elton—the complaisance with which she treated all he said and did—her furbished-up apology for entering the vicarage, she blushes with shame at the misconstruction he might have put on such behaviour, and the sufficient though mistaken warrant she had afforded for such misconstruction. She heartily repents what she has done, wishes she had submitted to be warned by Mr. Knightley—almost[Pg 229] wishes she had consented to Harriet’s marriage with Robert Martin.

It is a great relief to Emma when, by the time the snow-storm has ended, and Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley have returned to London, a ceremonious note comes from Mr. Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, announcing that he is about to comply with the pressing entreaties of some friends to pass a few weeks in Bath. His absence could not be better timed, and the unpleasant task of breaking to Harriet Smith his defection—or, rather, the worse explanation that he has never been her suitor—will be got over before he comes back. Emma is fain to trust that Harriet has not a retentive nature, and will soon forget her imaginary lover. But the match-maker is punished by Harriet’s very meekness and uncomplainingness under the double injury—though it is some time before Emma recognises in her friend the weak tenacity of a nature which is feeble in its gentleness and guilelessness.

II.
Jane Fairfax enters presently on the scene. Jane is the grand-daughter of the old vicar, the daughter of a young officer who fell in action, and whose wife did not survive her loss. Their little child had been committed to the care of her affectionate grandmother and aunt, who, however, could only have afforded her the most slender advantages in the way of education, had a compassionate fellow-officer of her late father not stepped forward, and taken the little girl to be educated with his own daughter. Jane’s home from childhood to womanhood has, therefore, been with the family of Colonel Campbell, and she has only returned at intervals to visit her relatives, Mrs. and Miss Bates, at Highbury.

[Pg 230]

The intention had been that the unprovided-for girl should be trained to render herself independent by teaching. But her friends shrank from anticipating what Jane Austen calls “the evil of Jane Fairfax’s going out into the world to earn her bread.” Farther on in the book, the author expresses still more decidedly, through her heroine, her pity for a woman in Jane Fairfax’s position. These were the settled opinions of gentlewomen in Jane Austen’s generation. We cannot now regard them as either very liberal or very wholesome, in the light of what has been developed of womanly independence, usefulness, courage, and cheerfulness. Most people of native spirit and intelligence, whatever their grade, would now be disposed to regard Jane Fairfax’s position, after she was grown up, in Colonel Campbell’s family—however good and kind they might be—as more detrimental to Jane’s self-respect, more disparaging in the eyes of others, more trying in every way, than encountering the ordeal of working for herself among comparative strangers.

Another—what I must call weakness and prejudice of the gifted writer, is visible here and elsewhere. In dwelling on the superior cultivation and refinement of the more intelligent and polished society which Jane Fairfax shared, while she resided in the London house of a man of good position and large income, to what she must have submitted to in the village of Highbury, in the house of her excellent but poorly-educated grandmother and aunt, whose narrow means are in keeping with their confined interests, I think Jane Austen’s aristocratic bias carries her too far in the line of mere superficial advantages. True culture is not so dependent on rank and wealth; and culture, though something, is hardly of such importance as she makes it. A rough diamond is a great deal better worth than a polished pebble. But Jane Fairfax is the diamond, not the pebble; so that polish is not wasted on her. She has a very pleasing person, a good understanding, and, what is more to the purpose, an excellent heart,[Pg 231] which is not injured by her undesirable circumstances. She does not learn to despise and undervalue Highbury or her homely kindred, in London, among her influential friends. She is a sort of heroine in Highbury, when she comes there on her periodical visits.

Jane Austen gives Emma Woodhouse’s impression of Jane Fairfax, when Emma sees Jane, after two years’ absence. Jane is very elegant, remarkably elegant (an exploded term of commendation often used by Jane Austen, when she desires to impress on her readers somebody’s special grace and refinement); and Emma has herself the highest value for elegance. “Her height was pretty, just such as almost everybody would think tall; her figure particularly graceful; her size a most becoming medium between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two. Emma could not but feel all this; and then her face, her features—there was more beauty in them altogether than she had remembered: it was not regular, but it was very pleasing beauty. Her eyes—a deep grey, with dark eyelashes and eyebrows—had never been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been used to cavil at as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom. It was a style of beauty of which elegance was the reigning character, and as such she must in honour, by all her principles, admire it; elegance of which, whether of person or mind, she saw so little in Highbury. There, not to be vulgar was distinction and merit.”

Yet Emma has no inclination, or only the most fleeting disposition, to cultivate Jane’s friendship. The fact is, the two girls, of the same age, have all their lives been held up to each other as most desirable companions and friends, until human nature, in its waywardness, has rebelled against the obligation.

George Knightley has told Emma very frankly that she does not like Jane Fairfax, because Emma sees in her the really accomplished young woman that Emma[Pg 232] wishes to be herself, but that she has not the self-denial and perseverance to become actually. Emma, in her best and most candid moments, is driven to own there is some truth in this accusation. At other times she defends her bad taste in preferring Harriet Smith as a friend, by asserting that she—Emma—can never get acquainted with Jane Fairfax. “She did not know how it was, but there was such coldness and reserve, such apparent indifference whether she pleased or not; and then her aunt was such an eternal talker! and she was made such a fuss with by everybody; and it was always imagined that they were to be so intimate; because their ages were the same, everybody had supposed they must be so fond of each other.”

In the meantime Miss Campbell, with whom Jane had been brought up, though inferior to her friend both in beauty and accomplishments, has, as Jane Austen says, “by that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs,” engaged the affections and married happily, after a short acquaintance, a Mr. Dixon, a young, agreeable, and rich man.

Jane Fairfax is one-and-twenty, the age at which she had fixed, in her own mind, on beginning her career as a governess. The following are the strong terms in which the author refers to the step about to be taken:—“With the fortitude of a devoted noviciate, she had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever.” Surely this is exaggerated language, even for the last century, and reflects painfully both on the footing which governesses occupied, and on the qualifications deemed essential to gentlewomen, among our mothers and grandmothers. There is also an inconsistency in it where this tale is concerned, and one perceives that Jane Austen’s rooted class prejudices cause even so wise a woman to contradict herself; for in the beginning of the book we have an evident indication how much respected and[Pg 233] liked Mrs. Weston had been when, as Miss Taylor, she had filled the post of governess to Emma Woodhouse. No relations in the story are happier and pleasanter than those which are involved in the warm and lasting friendship between the two who had been formerly teacher and pupil. Why might not Jane Fairfax have looked forward to being another Miss Taylor?

Colonel and Mrs. Campbell’s good sense had led them to acquiesce in Jane Fairfax’s determination, loth as they were to lose her company, and it was only because she had not been quite well, or in equal spirits for some time, that they had used their influence to induce her not to enter immediately on her arduous duties, but to spend the last three months of her liberty with her fond grandmother and aunt in Janet’s native air, while the Campbells paid their first visit to their married daughter settled in Ireland.

Emma heard the first, not very welcome news of Jane Fairfax’s coming, as she sought to get rid of Harriet Smith’s dolefulness, and at the same time to do an irksome duty by taking Harriet to call at the Bateses. Mrs. and Miss Bates loved to be called on, and Emma knew she was “considered by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her, as rather negligent in that respect, and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts.”

“She had had many a hint from Mr. Knightley, and some from her own heart, as to her deficiency, but none were equal to counteract the persuasion of its being very disagreeable—a waste of time—tiresome women—and all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second and third rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and therefore she seldom went near them.” But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in, observing, as she proposed it to Harriet, that as well as she could calculate, they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.

“The house belonged to people in business; Mrs. and[Pg 234] Miss Bates occupied the drawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized apartment which was everything to them, the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed; the quiet, neat old lady, who, with her knitting, was seated in the warmest corner, wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse; and her more active, talking daughter almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness, thanks for their visit, solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiries after Mr. Woodhouse’s health, cheerful communications about her mother’s, and sweet cake from the buffet.”

Emma had argued without her host, as she soon hears from Miss Bates, who prattles with the delightful abandon of the most innocent, unsuspicious heart, in company with the most honest thick head in the world. She rambles, breaks off, diverges right and left in her monologues, as only a very talkative, simple-minded, elderly woman—a Mrs. Nickleby or a Miss Bates—can wander, pull herself up, and start afresh in her conversation. Miss Bates has only just finished reading a letter from her niece to a previous visitor, and, of course, mentions what she has been about.

“Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest, ‘Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately? I am extremely happy. I hope she is well?’”

“‘Thank you, you are so kind!’ replied the happily-deceived aunt, while eagerly hunting for the letter. ‘Oh, here it is! I was sure it could not be far off; but I had put my huswife upon it, you see, without being aware, and so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand so very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table. I was reading it to Mrs. Cole, and since she went away I was reading it again to my mother, for it is such a pleasure to her—a letter from Jane—that she can never hear it often enough; so I knew it could not be far off, and here it is, only put under my huswife; and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says——But first of all I really must,[Pg 235] in justice to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter, only two pages you see, hardly two, and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half. My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well. She often says, when the letter is first opened, “Well, Hetty, now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work”—don’t you, ma’am? And then I tell her I am sure she would contrive to make it out for herself, if she had nobody to do it for her, every word of it. I am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word. And, indeed, though my mother’s eyes are not so good as they were, she can see amazingly well still, thank God! with the help of spectacles. It is such a blessing! My mother’s are really very good indeed. Jane often says when she is here, ‘I am sure, grandmamma, you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do, and so much fine work as you have done too! I only wish my eyes may last me as well.’

“All this spoken extremely fast, obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath; and Emma said something civil about the excellence of Miss Fairfax’s handwriting.

“‘You are extremely kind,’ replied Miss Bates, highly gratified, ‘you who are such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. I am sure there is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss Woodhouse’s. My mother does not hear, she is a little deaf, you know. Ma’am,’ addressing her, ‘do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging as to say about Jane’s handwriting?’

“And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it. She was pondering in the meanwhile upon the possibility, without seeming very rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly, under some slight excuse, when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her attention.

“‘My mother’s deafness is very trifling, you see,[Pg 236] just nothing at all. By only raising my voice, and saying anything two or three times over, she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice. But it is very remarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me. Jane speaks so distinct! However, she will not find her grandmamma at all deafer than she was two years ago, which is saying a great deal at my mother’s time of life; and it really is full two years, you know, since she was here. We never were so long without seeing her before, and as I was telling Mrs. Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough of her now.’

“‘Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?’

“‘Oh, yes, next week.’

“‘Indeed! That must be a very great pleasure.’

“‘Thank you. You are very kind. Yes, next week. Everybody is so surprised; and everybody says the same obliging things. I am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury as they can be to see her. Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days. So very good of him to send her the whole way. But they always do, you know. Oh, yes, Friday or Saturday next. That is what she writes about. That is the reason of her writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in the common course, we should not have heard from her before Tuesday or Wednesday.’

“‘Yes, so I imagined. I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing anything of Miss Fairfax to-day.’[52]

“‘So obliging of you!’ the kindly soul took the words in good faith, and surely smote Emma’s better nature. ‘No, we should not have heard, if it had not been for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon. My mother is so delighted, for she is to be three months with us, at least. Three months, she says so positively, as I am going to have the pleasure[Pg 237] of reading to you. The case is, you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly. They had not intended to go over till the summer, but she is so impatient to see them again; for, till she married last October, she was never away from them so much as a week, which must make it very strange to be—in different kingdoms, I was going to say, but, however, different countries; and so she wrote a very urgent letter to her mother, or her father—I declare I do not know which it was, but we shall see presently in Jane’s letter—wrote in Mr. Dixon’s name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly; and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to their country-seat—Ballycraig—a beautiful place, I fancy. Jane has heard a great deal of its beauty—from Mr. Dixon, I mean; I do not know that she has ever heard about it from anybody else; but it was very natural, you know, that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying his addresses, and as Jane used to be very often walking out with them—for Colonel and Mrs. Campbell were very particular about their daughter’s not walking out often with only Mr. Dixon, for which I do not at all blame them—of course she heard everything he might be telling Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland; and I think she wrote us word that he had shown them some drawings of the place—views that he had taken himself. He is a most amiable, charming young man, I believe. Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland from his account of things.’

“At this moment an ingenious and animating idea entering Emma’s brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Dixon, and the not going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of further discovery—‘You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to come to you at such a time. Considering the very particular friendship between her and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expected her[Pg 238] to be excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs. Campbell.’

“‘Very true; very true, indeed. The very thing that we have always been rather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such a distance from us for months together—not able to come if anything was to happen; but you see everything turns out for the best. They want her (Mr. and Mrs. Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be more kind and pressing than their joint invitation, Jane says, as you will hear presently. Mr. Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention. He is a most charming young man. Ever since the service he rendered Jane at Weymouth, when they were out in that party on the water, and she, by the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sails, would have been dashed into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone, if he had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her habit—I can never think of it without trembling—but ever since we had the history of that day, I have been so fond of Mr. Dixon!’

“‘But in spite of all her friend’s urgency, and her own wish of seeing Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting her time to you and Mrs. Bates?’

“‘Yes—entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Colonel and Mrs. Campbell think she does quite right, just what they should recommend; and, indeed, they particularly wish her to try her native air, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately.’”

The idea which has entered into Emma’s idle, fertile brain, is that Mr. Dixon, while paying his addresses to the well-endowed Miss Campbell, may in his secret heart have preferred her portionless friend; that there may also have been an unfortunate hidden attachment on Jane Fairfax’s part—one result of which is her disinclination to visit the Dixons.

Altogether, Emma’s notion is neither very sensible nor charitable. But sensible and amiable conclusions[Pg 239] are not always to be expected from spoilt girls, who, with rather an overweening opinion of their own deserts, are not altogether indisposed to find fault with the alleged perfections of threatened rivals. My readers will long ago have discovered that caution and prudence are not Emma Woodhouse’s strong points. Emma guesses as much herself, and on that very account is the more tempted to take a naughty pleasure in detecting undreamt of follies in that model of discretion—Jane Fairfax. But it is only by degrees that Emma is led on to the serious offence against fairness and kindness, of attributing anything more dishonourable than a rash, ill-judged bestowal of her affections, to Jane Fairfax.

When Emma and Jane first meet again on the occasion of Jane’s three months’ visit to Highbury, Emma is shaken for a moment, in her unreasonable dislike and unjustifiable fancies, till the old influences begin anew to work. Miss Bates is more tiresome than ever in her anxiety about her niece’s health. It is affectation in Jane to praise Emma’s playing on the piano,[53] when her own is so superior; worst of all, Jane Fairfax is so cold and reserved in her perfect good breeding—if anything more reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than on any other, and Emma believes she knows how to explain this caution.

But neither is Jane Fairfax communicative on another topic which is of the deepest interest to all Highbury, including even Emma Woodhouse, who considers herself above local gossip in general. Jane Fairfax had met Mr. Weston’s son, Frank Churchill, at[Pg 240] Weymouth, but not a syllable of real information can Emma get from her as to what he is like. “Is he handsome?” She believes he is reckoned a very fine young man. “Is he agreeable?” “He is generally thought so.” “Does he appear a sensible young man? a young man of information?” “At a watering-place, or in a common London acquaintance, it is difficult to decide on such points.”

Emma cannot forgive Jane Fairfax.

For Emma Woodhouse has a double source of interest in Frank Churchill. He is her friend, Mrs. Weston’s unknown step-son, who has indeed written her “a very handsome letter,” on her marriage with his father, but has not yet shown her the attention of coming to Randalls. He is kept away, his friends agree, by the tyrannical whims of the aunt who adopted him.

Emma with her lively penetration has also seen, and that not with displeasure, in spite of her protest against marriage for herself, that Mr. and Mrs. Weston have fixed on her, as far as they can have any choice in the matter, for Frank’s wife—nay, that all Highbury look on them as a predestined happy couple. Everything is so suitable—age, good looks, agreeable qualities, position, fortune. Emma does not deny these recommendations. No wonder she is curious to hear more of Frank Churchill.

Highbury is suddenly excited by the announcement of the approaching marriage of Mr. Elton, who has improved his time in Bath, and only returned to proclaim his happiness and prepare for his bride.

Emma is bent, as part of her atonement, on breaking the news to Harriet Smith, when Harriet comes in heated and agitated, crying “Oh, Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened?”

The blow has fallen already, Emma is sure, and prepares to bestow all the kindness that is due from her.

But the susceptible Harriet is occupied with quite another train of ideas. She has been shopping in Ford the[Pg 241] linendraper’s, when who should come in but Elizabeth Martin and her brother, the first time Harriet has met them since she refused young Martin. She thought she would have fainted. The sister had seen her directly, and looked another way. When the brother found her out, there was a little whispering, and Harriet had guessed he was persuading his sister to go up to her and speak to her as usual. She had been in such a tremble; but she had seen that the Martins, especially the brother, had tried to behave with the old kindness and friendliness. Poor little Harriet had been conscience-stricken, yet comforted by his good nature.

It is in the middle of this comical counter-current of distress, which at last swells high enough to provoke and alarm Emma, that in order to put the Martins out of Harriet’s silly, vacillating head, her friend, in a hurry, and not at all with the tender care she had intended, tells the girl of Mr. Elton’s prospects. And the shock revives Mr. Elton’s supremacy.

The future Mrs. Elton is a Miss Hawkins, who is said to be handsome, elegant, highly accomplished, perfectly amiable, and the possessor of ten thousand pounds. No wonder Mr. Elton is triumphant in the abundant consolation which has come to him.

Emma, while satisfied that a Mrs. Elton will be a relief and an aid in renewing her intercourse with the vicar, and while too indifferent on the subject to think much of the lady, has this sop for her mortification on Harriet’s account, that though, doubtless, good enough for Mr. Elton and Highbury, there is no superiority of connexion on Miss Hawkins’ side. She brings no name, no blood, no alliance. She is the younger daughter of a Bristol merchant. “All the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was very well married, to a gentleman in a great way, near Bristol, who kept two carriages. That was the wind-up of the history; that was the glory of Miss Hawkins.”

From these reflections, we may judge that Emma has more than a tinge of Mr. Darcy’s pride and superciliousness.[Pg 242] Was Jane Austen herself entirely free from the same defects? We are all fallible mortals.

Harriet Smith, easily carried captive by public opinion, now hears so much of Mr. Elton in every house she enters, and is so impressed by the gifts, graces, and happiness of the bride, that she would have been in a fair way to break her heart over her disappointment, had it not been for the diversion caused by a slight revival of her intercourse with the Martins. Under the influence of Robert Martin’s good feeling, his sister has called again for Harriet; and Emma is sufficiently shrewd to comprehend the danger of a heart’s being caught on the rebound. She takes care to regulate Harriet’s return of this civility. She herself carries Harriet in the Hartfield carriage to Abbey Mill Farm,[54] and pays a visit to an old servant while Harriet makes her call, which is thus abridged to a quarter of an hour’s length. Harriet’s account of it is rather a sad one. Mrs. Martin and the girls have been as uncomfortable as their visitor; and just when they were becoming more cordial, in consequence of somebody saying that Harriet was grown, when the whole party could not help looking at the wainscot by the window, where the different heights of all the girls stood as they had been noted by him last summer, the Hartfield carriage was announced. That was enough; the style and the shortness of the visit could not be mistaken. Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom Harriet had thankfully passed six weeks, not six months ago!

Though Emma has contrived it all, she has the[Pg 243] grace to feel it is a bad business, and would have given a great deal to have had the Martins in a higher rank of life.

It is some comfort to Emma to hear that Frank Churchill is at last coming to Randalls, to stay a whole fortnight. His father brings him at once to the Woodhouses; and the young man is, as nearly as possible, all that Emma’s fancy had painted him—handsome, gentlemanlike, lively, eager to be pleased, and by no means unwilling to admire, and show that he admires, Emma Woodhouse.

After he has won her good-will by his warm praises of his stepmother, and contrived in complimenting Mrs. Weston to compliment Emma, she begins to wonder if he, too, is aware of what their friends expect from their knowing each other, and whether his merry compliments are signs of acquiescence or defiance. As for herself, she must wait and know him better before she has any opinion on the subject; but the first impression is greatly in his favour.

Mr. Weston has business at the Crown Inn, and his son asks carelessly if there is a family named Fairfax—no, he believes the name is Barnes, or Bates—living near, as he has a call to make on them. There had been that degree of acquaintance between him and one of the members of the family, when living at Weymouth, which requires such an attention, and it may be as well shown then as afterwards.

To be sure, his father knows the Bateses and Miss Fairfax; let Frank call upon her by all means.

Any day will do, the young man explains; there is no particular necessity for calling that morning.

But Mr. Weston decides promptly that the mark of respect ought to be shown at once. Frank had met Jane Fairfax at the Campbells, where she was everybody’s equal; here she is with a poor old grandmother who has barely enough to live on. If he does not call early it will be a slight. And the young man allows himself to be convinced.

[Pg 244]

Mrs. Weston, in her turn, brings Frank Churchill—with whom she is on the happiest terms—the following day; and Emma walks and shops with them in Highbury. She is on such an easy footing with the young fellow already as to inquire about his visit of the previous morning.

He thanks Emma for her preparatory hint about the talkative aunt, who would otherwise have been the death of him. As it was, she entangled him into a visit of three-quarters of an hour’s length, when he had only meant to stay ten minutes.

Emma asks how he thinks Miss Fairfax is looking?

Ill, very ill, he tells her, that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill, and Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale as almost to give the appearance of bad health—a most deplorable want of complexion.

Emma defends Jane Fairfax’s soft, delicate skin from the accusation of having a sickly hue; but her companion only makes the defence adroitly into an opportunity for professing his preference for “a fine glow of health.”

Still Emma insists he must admire Miss Fairfax in spite of her complexion.

But he only shakes his head, laughs, and says he cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her complexion.

Emma is curious to know how much he had known of Jane Fairfax at Weymouth.

But when he first leaves the question unanswered, because he must go into a shop and show himself a citizen of Highbury by buying something, and then asserts it is always a lady’s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance, she has to inform him he is as discreet as Miss Fairfax herself.

After all, he is not unwilling to return to the subject, and talk of Miss Fairfax and her piano-playing; and Emma is as foolishly elated as a child, by a chance admission of his, which seems to confirm her former conclusion. Frank Churchill has proclaimed his own inability to judge Miss Fairfax’s musical powers, but[Pg 245] added that a gentleman who was a musical man would never ask the young lady to whom he was engaged to sit down to “the instrument,” if Miss Fairfax could sit down instead. The next moment Frank has to admit that the gentleman was Mr. Dixon, and the lady, to whom he was on the point of marriage, Miss Campbell.

Emma, in her amusement at the corroboration of her suspicions, does not attempt to conceal her inference from what her companion has said. Poor Mrs. Dixon! As to Miss Fairfax, she must have felt the improper and dangerous distinction.

Frank Churchill hesitates a little. “There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them;” but the next moment he owns that it is impossible for him to tell how it might have been behind the scenes, and leaves Emma to suppose what she likes.

Emma’s good opinion of Frank Churchill is in some danger of being nipped in the bud, when she hears that he has gone off to London merely to have his hair cut. A sudden freak seems to have seized him at breakfast, and he has sent for a chaise and set off, intending to return to dinner; but with no more important view that appeared than having his hair cut. There is no harm in his travelling sixteen miles on such an errand, but there is an air of foppery and nonsense in it which Emma cannot approve.

His father only calls him a coxcomb; but Mrs. Weston passes the matter over as quietly as possible, and Mr. Knightley, when informed of the expedition, is heard to mutter over his newspaper, “Hum! just the trifling, silly fellow I took him for.”

Frank Churchill comes back punctually. He has got his hair cut, and he laughs at himself with a good grace, but without seeming really ashamed of what he has done.

At a dinner-party in the neighbourhood, Emma receives a very interesting addition to the little history she has made out for Jane Fairfax. A fine piano from[Pg 246] Broadwood’s has arrived at the Bateses’, to the great astonishment of the family, who have at length come to the conclusion that it is one of Colonel Campbell’s kind gifts.

But why should Colonel Campbell present Jane Fairfax with a piano at this late date, and in this mysterious manner? Emma, on the first opportunity, taxes Frank Churchill with sharing her thoughts on the subject. The piano has not come from the Campbells; it might have come from the Dixons, from Mr. as well as Mrs. Dixon; and then Emma is so foolish and wrong as to repeat to Frank Churchill all her suspicions of Mr. Dixon’s secret preference for Jane, and Jane’s response to that preference, without, however, for a moment impugning the good intentions and principles of either.

He hears it all with the greatest gravity, and fully acknowledges the probability of her version of the gift. He is ready to be guided by her greater penetration. He did see in it at first only a mark of paternal kindness from Colonel Campbell; but when she mentioned Mrs. Dixon, he has felt how much more likely it is that the piano should be the tribute of warm female friendship; and now he can regard it in no other light than as an offering of love.

Oh! mischievous, thoughtless Frank, and credulous, confident Emma!

Miss Bates and Jane Fairfax, Harriet Smith, and other less important guests, join the party in the evening. Jane looks superior to all the others; still Emma can affectionately rejoice in the blooming sweetness and artless manner of her friend, with regard to whom it could never have been guessed how many tears she had been shedding lately. For “to be in company nicely dressed herself, and seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile, and look pretty, and say nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour.”

When the gentlemen join the ladies in the drawing-room, Frank Churchill immediately seeks out Emma, and[Pg 247] enters into an animated conversation with her, devoting himself to her.

Once, indeed, she notices him looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax. “What is the matter?” Emma asks.

He starts. “Thank you for rousing me,” he replies; “I believe I have been very rude; but really, Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd a way that I cannot keep my eyes from her. I never saw anything so outré. Those curls! I see nobody else looking like her. I must go and ask whether it is an Irish fashion—shall I? Yes, I will; I declare I will, and you shall see how she likes it—whether she colours.”

He is gone immediately, and Emma soon sees him standing before Miss Fairfax and talking to her; but as to the effect of his conversation, he has placed himself inadvertently exactly between her and Emma, so that the latter can distinguish nothing.

Mrs. Weston tells Emma that Mr. Knightley’s carriage—for the use of which on this occasion, Emma, who stands up for proper dignity, had already complimented him—brought over Miss Bates and Jane Fairfax, and is to take them home again.

Both Mrs. Weston and her old pupil are agreed in their praise of Mr. Knightley’s consideration and kindness. But when Mrs. Weston suggests another motive, and says Emma has infected her, for she has made a match between Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax, the listener bursts forth into vehement opposition. How can Mrs. Weston think of such a thing! Mr. Knightley must not marry. Emma cannot have little Henry, her nephew, cut out of Donwell. Jane Fairfax mistress of the Abbey! No, no! Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. Mrs. Weston is not to put it in his head. He is as happy as possible by himself, with his farm, and his sheep, and his library, and all the parish to manage. And he is extremely fond of his brother’s children. He has no occasion to marry, either to fill up his time or his heart.

[Pg 248]

Mrs. Weston is accustomed to Emma’s ebullitions. The elder lady contents herself with reminding her companion that if the gentleman really loves Jane Fairfax——

“Nonsense,” Emma interrupts the speaker hotly. “He does not care about Jane Fairfax in the way of love; I am sure he does not.”

Emma goes on to protest in extravagant terms that it would be a shameful, degrading connexion to have Miss Bates haunting the Abbey, thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane, and then flying off through half a sentence to her mother’s old petticoat, not that it was such a very old petticoat either.

“For shame, Emma!” Mrs. Weston cries out at being diverted against her conscience; and she will not resign her fancy. She has heard Mr. Knightley speak so very highly of Jane Fairfax. He is so concerned for her welfare. He is such an admirer of her music. What if he and not the Campbells prove the donor of the piano?

Emma, too, remains unconvinced, and as indignant as unconvinced. Mrs. Weston takes up ideas and runs away with them, as she has many a time reproached Emma for doing. She believes nothing of the kind of the piano. Only absolute proof will convince her that Mr. Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.

In the interest of the argument, Emma has lost sight of Frank Churchill, beyond the fact that he had found a seat next Miss Fairfax. Presently, however, he comes over to join their host in pressing Miss Woodhouse—the young lady of most consequence at the party—to play and sing.

Emma complies, only attempting what she can accomplish with credit. She is agreeably surprised by having Frank Churchill volunteer a pleasant second. He has all the praise usual on such occasions, and the two sing together again to their mutual satisfaction and that of the company.

[Pg 249]

Emma, conscious that she is to be far outstripped, resigns her place to Jane Fairfax. Frank Churchill sings with her also. It seems that they have sung together at Weymouth; but Emma cannot attend to them for the sight of Mr. Knightley among the most attentive of the listeners. Her objections to his marriage crowd into her mind and supersede every other thought. It would be a great disappointment to her brother, and consequently to her sister, a real injury to the children, a mortifying change to all. For herself she cannot endure the prospect. A Mrs. Knightley for them all to give way to! No, Mr. Knightley must never marry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell.

Mr. Knightley looks round, and comes and sits by Emma. She tries him in various ways. His admiration of the music is warm, but except for Mrs. Weston’s words would not have struck her. He cuts short her allusion to his kindness in reference to the carriage, but then he will never dwell on any kindness of his own. Above all he speaks with perfect calmness, and a shade of consolatory disapprobation, on the great topic of the evening, the gift of the piano. It was kindly given, but the Campbells would have done better to have announced their intention. Surprises are foolish things. He should have expected better judgment from Colonel Campbell.

From that moment Emma could have taken her oath Mr. Knightley had nothing to do with the present.

Jane Fairfax’s voice grows husky.

“That will do,” said Mr. Knightley, aloud. “You have sung quite enough for one evening.”

The inconsiderate audience beg for another song; and Frank Churchill is heard saying, “I think you could manage this without effort.”

Mr. Knightley now grows angry. “That fellow thinks of nothing but showing off his own voice. This must not be;” and he calls on Miss Bates to interfere.

[Pg 250]

The singing is put an end to, as there are no other young lady performers, but a dance is got up.

Mrs. Weston, capital in her country dances, takes her place at the piano.

Frank Churchill, with most becoming gallantry, secures Emma’s hand, and takes her to her place at the top of the set.

Emma is nothing loth, but she cannot help watching Mr. Knightley. He is no dancer in general; if he is now alert in seeking Jane Fairfax as a partner, the sign will be ominous. But no, he continues talking to his hostess, and looks on unconcernedly while Jane is claimed by some other.

Emma has no longer any alarm for Henry; his interests are yet safe; and she leads off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. Not more than five couples can be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness of it make it very delightful, and she finds herself well matched in a partner. They are a couple worth looking at.

Two dances, unfortunately, are all that can be allowed. It is growing late, and Miss Bates becomes anxious to get home, on her mother’s account. After some attempts, therefore, to be permitted to begin again, they are obliged to thank Mrs. Weston, look sorrowful, and have done.

“Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma to her carriage. “I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing would not have agreed with me, after yours.”

Emma had gone next day to shop with Harriet Smith at the Highbury linendraper’s. Shopping with Harriet was no easy matter, when it involved convincing Harriet that if she wanted a plain muslin it was of no use to look at a figured; and that a blue riband, be it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern.

Already the young ladies have encountered Frank Churchill and Mrs. Weston at the door of the Bateses’[Pg 251] house, opposite. Mrs. Weston is there, in performance of a promise she had forgotten, but of which her stepson had reminded her, that she should go and hear the newly-imported “instrument.”

Frank Churchill has attempted to get off from accompanying Mrs. Weston after he met Emma, and she refused to be one of the party. The matter has ended in Mrs. Weston’s carrying off Frank Churchill, according to their original intention, and the girls making their purchases at Ford’s. But in a few moments Miss Bates and Mrs. Weston come over together, and entreat Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith to join the others, and give their opinion of the piano.

Miss Bates pours forth one of the most amusing of her effusions.

“I hope Mrs. Bates and Miss Fairfax are——” began Emma.

“Very well, I am much obliged to you. My mother is delightfully well; and Jane caught no cold last night. How is Mr. Woodhouse? I am so glad to hear such a good account. Mrs. Weston told me you were here. ‘Oh, then,’ said I, ‘I must run across. I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across, and entreat her to come in. My mother will be so very happy to see her; and now we are such a nice party, she cannot refuse.’ ‘Aye, pray do,’ said Mr. Frank Churchill, ‘Miss Woodhouse’s opinion of the instrument will be worth having.’ ‘But,’ said I, ‘I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me.’ ‘Oh!’ said he, ‘wait half a minute, till I have finished my job,’ for, would you believe it, Miss Woodhouse, there he is, in the most obliging manner in the world, fastening in the rivet of my mother’s spectacles. The rivet came out, you know, this morning; so very obliging!—for my mother had no use of her spectacles, could not put them on, and, by-the-bye, everybody ought to have two pair of spectacles; they should, indeed, Jane said so. I meant to take them over to John Saunders, the first thing I did, but something or other hindered[Pg 252] me all the morning; first one thing, and then another, there is no saying what, you know. At one time, Patty came to say she thought the kitchen-chimney wanted sweeping. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘Patty, do not come with your bad news to me. Here is the rivet of your mistress’s spectacles out.’ Then the baked apples came home. Mrs. Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and obliging to us, the Wallises, always. I have heard some people say that Mrs. Wallis can be uncivil, and give a very rude answer; but we have never known anything but the greatest attention from them. And it cannot be for the value of our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread, you know? only three of us. Besides, dear Jane at present—and she really eats nothing—makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightened if you saw it. I dare not let my mother know how little she eats; so I say one thing, and then I say another, and it passes off. But about the middle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes so well as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome, for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr. Perry; I happened to meet him in the street. Not that I had any doubt before. I have so often heard Mr. Woodhouse recommend a baked apple. I believe it is the only way Mr. Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome. We have apple-dumplings, however, very often. Patty makes an excellent apple-dumpling. Well, Mrs. Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, and these ladies will oblige us.”

Emma would be very happy to wait on Mrs. Bates; and they did at last move out of the shop, with no further delay from Miss Bates than “How do you do, Mrs. Ford? I beg your pardon; I did not see you before. I hear you have a charming collection of new ribands from town. Jane came back delighted yesterday. Thank ye! the gloves do very well, only a little too large about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.”

“What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they were all in the street.

[Pg 253]

Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.

“I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of. Oh, my mother’s spectacles! So very obliging of Mr. Frank Churchill! ‘Oh,’ said he, ‘I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job of this kind excessively;’ which, you know, showed him to be so very——Indeed, I must say, that much as I have heard of him before, and much as I had expected, he far exceeds anything—I do congratulate you, Mrs. Weston, most warmly. He seems everything the fondest parent could——‘Oh,’ said he, ‘I can fasten that rivet; I like a job of that kind excessively.’ I never shall forget his manner; and when I brought out the baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so very obliging as to take some, ‘Oh,’ said he directly, ‘there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the finest-looking home-baked apples I ever saw in my life.’ That, you know, was so very——and I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment. Indeed, they are very delightful apples, and Mrs. Wallis does them full justice, only we do not have them baked more than twice, and Mr. Woodhouse made us promise to have them done three times; but Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it. The apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt; all from Donwell—some of Mr. Knightley’s most liberal supply. He sends us a sack every year, and certainly there never was such a keeping apple anywhere as one of his trees—I believe there are two of them. My mother says the orchard was always famous in her younger days. But I was really quite struck the other day, for Mr. Knightley called one morning, and Jane was eating these apples, and we talked about them, and said how much she enjoyed them, and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock. ‘I am sure you must be,’ said he, ‘and I will send you another supply, for I have a great many more than I can ever use. William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year. I will[Pg 254] send you some more before they get good for nothing.’ So I begged he would not—for really, as to ours being gone, I could not absolutely say that we had a great many left—it was but half a dozen, indeed—but they should all be kept for Jane, and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more, so liberal as he had been already, and Jane said the same; and when he was gone she almost quarrelled with me—no, I should not say quarrelled, for we never had a quarrel in our lives, but she was quite distressed that I had owned the apples were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him believe we had a great many left. ‘Oh,’ said I, ‘my dear, I did say as much as I could.’ However, the very same evening William Larkins came over with a large basket of apples, a bushel at least, and I was very much obliged, and went down and spoke to William Larkins, and said everything, as you may suppose. William Larkins is such an old acquaintance, I am always glad to see him. But, however, I found out afterwards from Patty that William said it was all the apples of that sort his master had; he had brought them all, and now his master had not one left to bake or boil. William did not seem to mind it himself, he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many—for William, you know, thinks more of his master’s profit than anything—but Mrs. Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their being all sent away. She could not bear that her master should not be able to have another apple-tart this spring. He told Patty this, but bid her not mind it, and be sure not to say anything to us about it, for Mrs. Hodges would be cross sometimes, and as long as so many sacks were sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder; and so Patty told me, and I was exceedingly shocked indeed! I would not have Mr. Knightley know anything about it for the world! He would be so very——I wanted to keep it from Jane’s knowledge, but unluckily I had mentioned it before I was aware.”

“Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door, and her visitors walked upstairs without having[Pg 255] any regular narration to attend to, pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will. ‘Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. Pray take care, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase; rather darker and narrower than one could wish. Miss Smith, pray take care. Miss Woodhouse, I am quite concerned; I am sure you have hurt your foot. Miss Smith, the step at the turning.’”[55]

The scene which the opening of the door presents is often quoted for its perfection of quiet realism. “The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered was tranquillity itself. Mrs. Bates, deprived of her usual employment, slumbering on one side of the fire; Frank Churchill, at a table near her, most deeply occupied about her spectacles; and Jane Fairfax, standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.”

“What!” said Mrs. Weston, “have not you finished it yet? You would not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate.”

“I have not been working uninterruptedly,” he replied; “I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily; it was not quite firm, an unevenness in the floor, I believe. You see we have been wedging one leg with paper. This was very kind of you to be persuaded to come. I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home.”

This last sentence is for Emma, as he immediately renews his marked attentions to her, contrives that she shall be seated by him, looks out the best roasted apple for her, and tries to make her advise him in his work, till Jane is ready to sit down to the piano.

There is no doubt Jane is agitated. Emma imagines that she has not possessed the instrument long enough to get accustomed to its associations. When the player[Pg 256] is able to do herself justice, everybody is loud in praise of the piano.

Frank Churchill, in the middle of an assertion that whoever Colonel Campbell had employed, the person has not chosen ill, introduces with a smile to Emma certain doubles entendres with regard to the musical taste of the old Weymouth party, and to the enjoyment which Miss Fairfax’s friends in Ireland must have in imagining what she will be doing, until even Emma tells him in a whisper it is not fair, hers has been a random guess.

Jane pretends not to hear, and answers with the briefest acknowledgment of his apparent meaning. He goes to her and urges her to play one of the waltzes they danced last night, exclaiming, “Let me hear them once again.”

As she plays, he exclaims on the felicity of hearing again a tune which has made one happy before, adding, “If I mistake not, that was danced at Weymouth.”

She looks at him for a moment, colours deeply, and plays something else.

He brings over some music, including a new set of “The Irish Melodies,” to show to Emma. The music had been selected and sent with the piano. Frank Churchill honours that part of the gift particularly. It has all been so thoughtful, so complete. True affection only could have prompted it.

Emma wishes he would not be so pointed in his remarks, but glancing at Jane, she catches the ghost of a smile hovering about her lips, and has less scruple in her amusement. This excellent Jane Fairfax indulges in very reprehensible feelings.

Mr. Knightley passes the window on horseback; and Miss Bates trots into the next room, and from an open window holds a colloquy with him, charmingly characteristic of both speakers, and perfectly audible to the visitors in the apartment she has just quitted.

“How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Very well, I thank you; so obliged to you for the carriage last night. We were just in time; my mother just ready for us. Pray[Pg 257] come in; do come in; you will find some friends here.”

So began Miss Bates, and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say, “‘How is your niece, Miss Bates? I want to inquire after you all, but particularly your niece. How is Miss Fairfax? I hope she caught no cold last night. How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss Fairfax is!’

“And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear anything else. The listeners were amused, and Mrs. Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning. But Emma still shook her head in steady scepticism.

“‘So obliged to you! So very much obliged to you for the carriage,’ resumed Miss Bates.

“He cut her short with, ‘I am going to Kingston. Can I do anything for you?’

“‘Oh, dear! Kingston, are you? Mrs. Cole was saying the other day she wanted something from Kingston.’

“‘Mrs. Cole has servants to send. Can I do anything for you?’

“‘No, I thank you. But do come in. Who do you think is here? Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith, so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte. Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in.’

“‘Well,’ said he, in a deliberating manner, ‘for five minutes, perhaps.’

“‘And here is Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill, too. Quite delightful, so many friends.’

“‘No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minutes. I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can.’

“‘Oh, do come in; they will be so very happy to see you.’

“‘No, no; your room is full enough. I will call another day and hear the pianoforte.’

“‘Well, I am so sorry. Oh, Mr. Knightley, what a delightful party last night; how extremely pleasant![Pg 258] Did you ever see such dancing? Was not it delightful? Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill; I never saw anything equal to it.’

“‘Oh, very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hearing everything that passes, and’ (raising his voice still more) ‘I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too. I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs. Weston is the very best country dance player, without exception, in England. Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return; but I cannot stay to hear it.’

“‘Oh, Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence—so shocked! Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!’

“‘What is the matter now?’

“‘To think of you sending us all your store apples. You said you had a great many, and now you have not one left. We really are so shocked. Mrs. Hodges may well be angry. William Larkins mentioned it here. You should not have done it, indeed you should not have done it. Ah, he is off.’”

Frank Churchill easily induces his father to consent to give a ball the night before Frank is to leave Randalls. No room in the house is large enough to meet the hospitable gentleman’s views, and it is at last fixed to give the ball at the Crown Inn. Emma is engaged by the hero of the evening for the first two dances; and even the grave Jane Fairfax is sufficiently moved by the brilliant prospect to exclaim, “Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing will happen to prevent the ball. I look forward to it, I own, with very great pleasure.”

But time and tide, and the humours of a tyrannical woman, accommodate themselves to no man. A summons arrives for Frank Churchill to return instantly to his uncle’s place at Enscombe, as his aunt is far too unwell to do without him.

[Pg 259]

Frank has no great belief in the illness, but he is forced to obey orders. The ball has to be deferred to the uncertain period of his next visit.

Extremely disconsolate, he pays his farewell calls, and when at Hartfield, while talking of other things—the length of time before he came to Highbury, his recent leave-taking at the Bateses, he seems suddenly on the point of a serious declaration, “In short,” said he, after getting up and walking to a window—“perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—I think you can hardly be without suspicion——”

But either Emma does not afford him sufficient encouragement, or some other obstacle occurs to hinder him, for he goes no further than a profession of warm regard for Hartfield.

To Emma the loss of the ball and her partner is a severe disappointment. She finds Jane Fairfax’s comparative composure on the misfortune odious. But she is a little softened by hearing of the bad headaches from which Jane has been suffering, and is willing to admit that her unbecoming indifference may proceed from the apathy engendered by bad health.

Emma has arrived at the point of believing she returns Frank Churchill’s love. At first, when she misses him and the ball most, she fancies she is very much in love; then the “very much” dwindles down to a “little,” since Emma, who is still quite capable of reasoning on her feelings, makes the acute observation, that though she admires and likes him, she continues to see faults in him; and she notices that in all the imaginary scenes and dialogues which she invents for herself and Frank Churchill, while he is to urge his suit with all the eloquence of passion and true affection, she is always to refuse him, in the tenderest and most delicate manner indeed, but still to refuse him. Their love is inevitably destined to subside into friendship.

Emma had long ago determined never to quit her father, but it strikes her now—that were she strongly[Pg 260] attached to Frank, there would be, even in anticipation, more struggle in the sacrifice.

Having come to this sage conclusion, Emma is a little sorry for Frank; the next thing is to provide him with a substitute for the wife he can never win from Hartfield. Her own partiality for her friend, and desire to atone to her for her former error, together with an accidental polite reference in one of his letters to his step-mother, puts Harriet Smith into Emma’s creative brain. For she is not cured of match-making, she is still inveterately possessed with what is most apt to be the clever, warm-hearted matron’s mania for arranging the matrimonial affairs of others.

In fact, Emma, with all her youthful pride and dignity, is in some danger of becoming a meddler and busybody in other people’s business. Even the knowledge she might have had of how different are Mr. and Mrs. Weston’s—not to say Mr. and Mrs. Churchill’s—expectations for their son and nephew, does not serve to crush the foolish idea, though it only lurks in the background in the meantime.

III.
A new event stirs Highbury. Mr. Elton brings home his bride. She is first seen in her pew at church, and is ecstatically admired.

Emma withholds her judgment, even beyond the opportunity given by her first call at the vicarage, when she takes Harriet Smith with her. Emma will not pronounce an opinion yet, beyond the very modified admission that Mrs. Elton is “elegantly dressed,” while the meekly magnanimous little goose, Harriet, finds the bride “beautiful, very beautiful,” and adds, with a sigh, “Happy creature! He called her ‘Augusta;’ how delightful!”

[Pg 261]

On farther acquaintance, Emma discovers, with a certain severe satisfaction, that Mr. Elton, as she has learnt to know him, is fitly mated.

Mrs. Elton is one of Jane Austen’s most cleverly and sharply-drawn characters. The pretentious, underbred woman, “pert and familiar,” without the faintest sense of her own deficiencies—on the contrary, with an overflowing self-satisfaction and self-conceit patronising everybody and everything—is hit to the life. We have all heard similar boasting to that of Mrs. Elton on the subject of her rich Bristol brother-in-law’s house, “Maple Grove.” We have listened to like-minded proposals “to explore” with the Sucklings, when they bring over their barouche-landau, our own accessible, familiar neighbourhood, every step of which is intimately known to us. We have been recommended to watering-places, and offered introductions by those whom we were tempted to regard as little called upon or qualified to give us advice and assistance. We have been treated to the modern “doubles” of all Mrs. Elton’s bridal airs and affectations; that sporting of the newly-acquired importance of the matron; that literal quoting, in the worst taste, of Mr. E. and the “cara sposa;” that free and easy manner of naming our own familiar friends by their surnames,[56] as if the men were the new comer’s special cronies; that vulgar superciliousness with regard to the supposed disadvantages and consequent inferiority of other people whom we have every reason to esteem and cherish. Have we not been in danger of crying out with Emma, “Insufferable woman! worse than I had supposed. Absolutely insupportable! Knightley! I could not have believed it. Knightley! Never seen him in her life before, and call him Knightley! and discover that he is a gentleman! A little, upstart, vulgar being, with her Mr. E. and her cara sposa, and her resources, and all her airs[Pg 262] of pert pretension and underbred finery,[57] actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is a gentleman! I doubt whether he will return the compliment, and discover her to be a lady. I could not have believed it! And to propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club! One would fancy we were bosom friends! And Mrs. Weston! Astonished that the person who brought me up should be a gentlewoman! Worse and worse! I never met with her equal. Much beyond my hopes! Harriet is disgraced by any comparison.”

Mr. Elton, fortunately or unfortunately, is more than satisfied with his choice. It is fortunate for his matrimonial felicity; it is unfortunate where the man’s mind and heart are concerned. It proves him hardly capable of appreciating any higher qualities than those with which his wife is endowed; and under her influence he is certain to deteriorate.

Mrs. Elton soon shows her resentment at Emma’s coldness. Her pique causes the vicar’s wife to behave to Harriet Smith with a sneering negligence, which convinces Emma that Harriet’s attachment, and her own share in it, have been “an offering to conjugal unreserve” which does little credit to Mr. Elton’s generosity and honour.

With the ready propensity to rivalry of a small, vain, and vindictive nature, Mrs. Elton puts herself, as she judges, at the head of an opposite faction. She conceives a violent fancy for Jane Fairfax, whom she oppresses with condescending notice and attention, accepted in grateful good faith by Jane’s relations, and by Jane herself, because no better friendship, as Mr. Knightley takes care to remind Emma, offers itself to the lonely girl.

One good thing comes to Emma as the result of her conversation with Mr. Knightley on the incongruity[Pg 263] of Jane Fairfax’s intimacy at the vicarage. Emma has the courage to hint to Mr. Knightley that the extent of his admiration for Jane Fairfax may take him by surprise some day.

“Mr. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or some other cause, brought the colour into his face as he answered—

“‘Oh! are you there? But you are miserably behind-hand. Mr. Cole gave me a hint of it six weeks ago.’

“He stopped, Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Weston, and did not herself know what to think. In a moment he went on—

“‘That will never be, however, I can assure you. Miss Fairfax, I daresay, would not have me if I were to ask her, and I am sure I shall never ask her.’

“Emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest, and was pleased enough to exclaim, ‘You are not vain, Mr. Knightley; I will say that for you.’

“He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful, and, in a manner which showed him not pleased, soon afterwards said, ‘So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?’

“‘No, indeed, I have not. You have scolded me too much for match-making for me to presume to take such a liberty with you. Oh! no; upon my word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax, or Jane anybody. You would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way if you were married.’

“Mr. Knightley was thoughtful again. The result of his reverie was—‘No, Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprise. I never had a thought of her in that way, I assure you.’ And soon afterwards, ‘Jane Fairfax is a very charming young woman; but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect. She has a fault. She has not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.’

“Emma could not but rejoice to hear she had a fault.

[Pg 264]

“‘Well, Mrs. Weston,’ said Emma triumphantly, when he left them, ‘what do you say now to Mr. Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax?’

“‘Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of not being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last. Do not beat me.’”

At a dinner-party given by the Woodhouses, to which John Knightley has come down by accident, Jane Fairfax is present by special invitation, her hostess being a little conscience-stricken for her sins of omission in that quarter.

John Knightley looks at Mrs. Elton in her lace and pearls, taking notes for Isabella’s edification; but he consents to talk to a quiet girl and old acquaintance like Jane Fairfax. In their conversation, it comes out that she goes every morning before breakfast to the post-office[58] to fetch the letters. It is her daily errand when at Highbury.

She provokes the remark from her companion that the post-office has a great charm at one period of people’s lives. When Miss Fairfax has lived to Mr. John Knightley’s age, she will begin to think letters are never worth going through such a shower of rain as he has seen her out in that morning, to obtain them.

He makes her blush. What is worse than his blunt, friendly remonstrance, he attracts the attention of the rest of the company to the subject. Mr. Woodhouse strikes in with his plaintive protest against anybody, a young lady especially, exposing herself to wet. Mrs. Elton rushes to the rescue with her loud, authoritative[Pg 265] reproach: “My dear Jane, what is this I hear? Going to the post-office in the rain! You sad girl; how could you do such a thing?” Mrs. Weston is appealed to, and she adds her quiet, sensible prohibition against young people’s running any risk.

“Oh!” cries Mrs. Elton, “she shall not do such a thing again. The man who fetches our letters shall inquire for yours too, and bring them to you.”

Jane, thus baited, stands mildly but firmly at bay. Mrs. Elton is extremely kind, but Jane cannot give up her early walk.[59] She is advised to be out of doors. The post-office is an object.

Mrs. Elton, who has neither good breeding nor tact, will not be put down.

“My dear Jane, say no more about it. The thing is determined—that is” (laughing affectedly) “as far as I can presume to determine anything without the concurrence of my lord and master. You know, Mrs. Weston, you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves.”

Still Jane looks unconquered.

The conversation wanders to handwriting. John Knightley refers to the statement that the same sort of writing often prevails in a family, and observes that Isabella and Emma write very much alike.

“Yes,” said his brother hesitatingly, “there is a likeness. I know what you mean—but Emma’s hand is the strongest.”

“Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said poor Mr. Woodhouse, “and always did, and so does Mrs. Weston,” with half a sigh and half a smile at her.

Dinner is on the table. Mrs. Elton, before she can be spoken to, is ready; and before Mr. Woodhouse has reached her, with his request to be allowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, is saying—

“Must I go first? I really am ashamed of always leading the way!”

[Pg 266]

Jane’s solicitude about fetching her letters has not escaped Emma, who ascribes it to an unworthy source; and if the young hostess had not been in her own house, therefore on honour to Jane, Emma might have been wicked enough to make some remark on the expedition or the expense of Irish mails.

Frank Churchill returns on the earliest opportunity, and the ball at the Crown is to take place. A council of ladies and gentlemen is first summoned to pronounce on the rooms. Emma thinks the preliminary gathering absurdly large. It is no great compliment to be the confidential adviser of Mr. Weston when he takes everybody into his confidence.

Frank Churchill is almost as bad, restlessly rushing to the door to receive every new arrival, and providing umbrellas, under which Miss Bates and her niece may cross the street.

The Eltons, too, are there, Mrs. Elton eager to put in her word, and demonstrative as usual to Jane Fairfax. Emma wonders what Frank Churchill will think of the bride’s manners. She is not long left in doubt.

“How do you like Mrs. Elton?” Emma asks him in a whisper.

“Not at all.”

“You are ungrateful,” said Emma, thinking of a flattering account she has heard the lady give his father of what she had been told of Frank.

“Ungrateful! What do you mean?” he cries quickly; then, changing from a frown to a smile, “No, do not tell me. I do not want to know what you mean. Where is my father?”

Emma can hardly understand Frank Churchill; he seems in an odd humour, but she makes no objection when he claims her for his partner, though she has to submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton, who opens the ball with Mr. Weston; yet Emma has always considered it her ball. It is almost enough to make her think of marrying. Still Emma is able to enjoy the dance, and be satisfied that Frank Churchill dances as[Pg 267] well as she had thought; though it is indubitable to her, and to her honour, the conviction rather affords her relief than wounds her vanity, that Frank Churchill thinks less of her than formerly. There is nothing like flirtation between them; they seem more like easy, cheerful friends than lovers.

What troubles Emma more than Frank Churchill’s early secession as a lover is Mr. Knightley’s not dancing. There he is, among the standers by, where he ought not to be. He ought to be dancing, not classing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and whist-players, who are pretending to feel an interest in the dance, till their rubbers are made up—so young as he looks, his tall, upright figure among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men.

He moves a few steps forward, and these few steps forward are enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner, with what natural grace he must have danced would he but take the trouble.

Indeed, Emma has always entertained the highest opinion of George Knightley’s air and looks. She has told Harriet Smith, in trying to teach her simply what a well-bred man is like, that Mr. Knightley must be put out of count, he is so very superior to other people. Emma has never seen a man on whose whole person and address “gentleman” is more legibly written—and here Emma is right.

The ball rewards the anxious cares and incessant attentions of Mrs. Weston by going off happily, as old balls in county halls and ball-rooms of market-town inns had a knack of doing. People had fewer pleasures then, and were more easily entertained. They have left a pleasant flavour behind them—these early, social, eminently respectable country balls, when whitewashed walls were considered picturesquely hidden by a few common evergreens, and the mere sight of primitively chalked floors set young hearts dancing before the feet executed their “steps.”

One incident impresses Emma. Harriet Smith is[Pg 268] sitting down—the only young lady without a partner. Mr. Elton is strolling about ostentatiously in her vicinity. Mrs. Weston, as in duty bound, tries to get him to dance. He professes his willingness, though getting an old married man, to become her partner. She points out to him a more fitting partner—the young lady who has sat down—Miss Smith. “Miss Smith! Oh, Miss Smith he has not observed. Mrs. Weston is extremely obliging, but his dancing days are over;” and a meaning smile passes between him and his wife.

This is the amiable, obliging Mr. Elton of other days! Emma can scarcely conceal her indignation, until she sees Mr. Knightley, whom Mr. Elton has joined, come forward and lead Harriet to the set. Never has Emma been more surprised, seldom more delighted. His dancing is as good as she anticipated, and she would have been tempted to think Harriet too lucky had it not been for what went before.

Emma expresses her gratification to Mr. Knightley later in the evening, and he increases it by telling her he has found Harriet Smith more conversable than he expected. She has some first-rate qualities which Mrs. Elton is totally without. An unpretending, single-minded, artless girl is infinitely to be preferred, by any man of sense and taste, to such a woman as Mrs. Elton.

They are interrupted by Mr. Weston calling on everybody to begin dancing again. “Come, Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you all doing? Come, Emma, set your companions the example. Everybody is lazy! everybody is asleep!”

“I am ready,” said Emma, “whenever I am wanted.”

“Whom are you going to dance with?” asks Mr. Knightley.

She hesitates a moment, and then replies, “With you, if you will ask me.”

“Will you?” said he, offering his hand.

“Indeed I will. You have shown that you can[Pg 269] dance, and you know we are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper.”

“Brother and sister!—no, indeed.”

As ill luck will have it, the very next day Frank Churchill rescues Harriet Smith from the rudeness of a party of tramps and gipsies, and brings her on his arm to the nearest house (Hartfield); when, acting according to the instincts of such amiable but helpless heroines, Harriet immediately faints away.

Such a romantic adventure is not lost on Emma. It stimulates immensely her idle dream of how handsome a young couple Frank Churchill and Harriet would make, and how desirable it would be to bring them together.

Emma is not deterred from this last mischievous crochet, by a special revelation of Harriet’s former foolish sentiments, which the girl considers herself called on to make. Mr. Elton has behaved so very badly to Harriet, that meek as the girl is, she can admire him at a humble distance no longer. She brings solemnly to Emma a little Tunbridge box, full of treasures which have become valueless, and which Harriet wishes Miss Woodhouse should see her destroy. There is a bit of court-plaister, left over from a piece with which Emma had made Harriet supply Mr. Elton, when he had happened to cut his hand in their service. There is also a stump of a pencil, which he flung aside after he had used up the lead in writing a recipe for spruce-beer, at Mr. Knightley’s dictation.

Emma is lost between wonder and shame. Harriet’s auto da fé has a double motive. She can no longer reverence Mr. Elton, and she can reverence another man, for whose sake she vaguely protests she is determined to remain single, since it would be utter presumption in her to think he could ever seek her out.

Emma gathers as much as this from her companion, and hesitates, with just a grain of dawning prudence, whether she ought to speak, or let Harriet’s heroic resolution pass in silence.

But Harriet may think it unkind; besides, just a[Pg 270] little encouragement, judiciously administered, may not be amiss to check further confidences on Harriet’s part. She is to be shown that her “dear Miss Woodhouse” does not disapprove of her aspirations, and at the same time made to comprehend that the old, improper, undesirable discussion of hopes and chances is not to be renewed. Therefore, without mentioning Frank Churchill’s name, Emma tells Harriet that her feelings are natural and honourable to her, and at the same time bestows on her some excellent significant advice about not giving way to her feelings; on the contrary, she must let the gentleman’s behaviour be the guide to her sentiments as well as to her conduct. But Emma rather undoes her teaching by volunteering an additional “He is your superior, no doubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place; there have been matches of greater disparity.”

At the end of the little lecture Harriet is at once grateful and submissive.

In the course of the summer, when, from Mr. and Mrs. Churchill’s staying so near as Richmond, Frank Churchill can come often to Randalls, Mr. Knightley, who has taken an early dislike to the popular young man, learns to dislike him still more. He, Mr. Knightley, begins to suspect double dealing on Frank Churchill’s part, double dealing which has to do with Emma Woodhouse and Jane Fairfax. It seems plain that Emma is his object. His own attentions coincide with his father’s hints, and his step-mother’s guarded silence. But while all their world is giving Frank Churchill to Emma, and Emma herself is secretly giving him to Harriet, Mr. Knightley learns to suspect him of an inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax.

Mr. Knightley cannot read the riddle; but he is convinced that he perceives symptoms of intelligence between Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax. There are not only betrayals of admiration for Jane—out of place in Emma’s lover; but Mr. Knightley is persuaded, in[Pg 271] spite of his belief in Jane Fairfax’s discretion, that there is a liking, even a private understanding, between the two visitors to Highbury.

A large party, including Mrs. Weston and Frank Churchill, Miss Bates and Jane Fairfax, and Mr. Knightley, have met by chance at Hartfield. Mr. Perry passes by on horseback.

“By-the-bye,” said Frank Churchill to his step-mother, “what became of Mr. Perry’s plan of setting up his carriage?”

Mrs. Weston answers she never heard of it.

He maintains she wrote him word of it three months before.

She declares it is impossible.

He insists that he remembers it perfectly. Mrs. Perry had told somebody, and was very happy about it. It had been her proposal, as she thought being out in bad weather did him harm.

Mrs. Weston cannot remember.

Then it must have been a dream, Frank Churchill turns round and suggests.

His father, who has not heard all the conversation, inquires if Perry is really going to set up a carriage. Mr. Weston is glad Perry can afford it. Did Frank have it from himself?

No, Frank replies, laughing, he seems to have had it from nobody. Of course, it must have been a dream. He dreams of everybody at Highbury, and when he has gone through his particular friends, then he begins dreaming of Mr. and Mrs. Perry.

His father comments on the odd coherence and probability of the dream, just what was likely to happen.

At last Miss Bates gets in her word. It is very singular—she does not mean that Mr. Frank Churchill may not have had such a dream, but there actually had been such a proposal. Mrs. Perry had come to Miss Bates one morning in great spirits, believing that she had prevailed in persuading her husband to have a carriage. It had been spoken of in confidence, but[Pg 272] the Coles had known of it. It was an extraordinary dream.

Mr. Knightley, who has been listening to the whole discussion, thinks he discerns confusion, suppressed and laughed away, in Frank Churchill’s face. Mr. Knightley tries to see the expression of Jane Fairfax’s, but in vain; at the same time he becomes aware that Frank Churchill is striving still more intently to catch her eye, with equal want of success.

During the evening Frank Churchill looks on a side-table for the little Knightleys’ alphabets. It is a dull-looking evening, he says, fit for winter amusements; and he wishes to puzzle Emma as he did once before. When the box with the letters is brought, Frank and Emma begin quickly forming words. He pushes one before Jane Fairfax. She glances round the table and applies herself to it, discovers the word, and with a faint smile pushes away the letters. They are not mixed with the others, and Harriet Smith, who tries every heap without making anything of it, draws this one towards her and begins to puzzle over it.

Mr. Knightley is sitting next to Harriet, and she turns to him for help. Soon she proclaims with exultation, blunder. Jane Fairfax blushes.

Mr. Knightley connects the word and the blush with the dream. Yet how the delicacy of his favourite must have gone to sleep! He is grieved and angry. He suspects the game is being made a mere vehicle for trick and gallantry in Frank Churchill’s hands.

Indignant and alarmed, Mr. Knightley continues to watch Frank Churchill. He prepares a short word for Emma, which she soon makes out. The two laugh over it, though she cries, “Nonsense, for shame!”

Mr. Knightley hears Frank Churchill say, with a glance towards Jane, “I will give it to her, shall I?”

Emma opposes the proceeding with laughing urgency. It is done, however. Mr. Knightley’s keen curiosity assists him. He deciphers “Dixon,” though he has not Jane Fairfax’s key to the insinuation.

[Pg 273]

She is evidently displeased; looks up, and seeing herself watched, blushes deeply. She says, “I did not know that proper names were allowed,” and pushes away the letters with even an angry spirit. She turns to her aunt as a signal that it is time to leave.

Mr. Knightley thinks he sees another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her, and swept away by her unexamined. She is looking for her shawl afterwards, and Frank Churchill is searching also for it. It is growing dusk, the room is in confusion, and Mr. Knightley cannot tell how they part.

Mr. Knightley remains behind the others, to give Emma a warning. He asks her what is the peculiar sting of the last word given to her and Miss Fairfax? Why is it entertaining to the one, and distressing to the other?

Emma looks disconcerted. It is only a joke among themselves, she says.

The joke, he observes, gravely, seems confined to her and Mr. Churchill.

Mr. Knightley has not done. He tries, though disappointed by her silence, and painfully impressed with the conviction of her attachment to young Churchill, to furnish her with another hint. Is she perfectly acquainted with the degree of intimacy between the gentleman and lady they have been speaking of?

Perfectly, Emma tells him, with conviction.

Has she never received any reason to think he admired her, or she admired him.

Never, for the twentieth part of a moment. How could such an idea come into his head?

He has imagined he has seen something of attachment—looks which he did not believe were meant for the public.

Emma is very much amused. She rallies him on the flights of his fancy, which she would be sorry to check. There is no admiration. The appearances he has noticed proceed from peculiar circumstances she cannot explain. There is a good deal of nonsense in it all, but no two people can be farther from admiration[Pg 274] or attachment—at least, she presumes it is so with Jane Fairfax. As to the gentleman’s indifference, Emma can answer for it. She is in gay spirits, which Mr. Knightley, in quitting her, does not at all share.

IV.
There are to be two expeditions to Box Hill, the one having given rise to the other. Mrs. Elton has organised an “exploring” picnic for her brother and sister, the Sucklings, of Maple Grove, with their barouche-landau. Emma and the Westons are to have something of the same description, but very different—quiet, unpretending, and elegant, in contrast to the fuss, ostentation, and regular eating and drinking of the first.

What is Emma’s disgust to find that Mr. Weston, in his incorrigible good nature, has proposed to unite the two parties, since Mrs. Elton had been deprived of the company of the Sucklings. Chagrin or no chagrin, Emma has to submit; and Mrs. Elton is impatient to settle about the pigeon pies and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse overthrows all calculation, and threatens a delay of weeks.

“Is not this most vexatious, Knightley?” Mrs. Elton appeals, with her characteristic freedom, to the Squire of Donwell. “Such weather for exploring!”

“You had better explore Donwell,” suggests the forbearing gentleman; “that may be done without horses. Come and eat my strawberries; they are ripening fast.”

If he has spoken in jest, he has to act in earnest, for the proposal is caught at with delight. Not only so; Mrs. Elton elects herself queen of the feast. “I am lady patroness, you know. It is my party. I will bring my friends with me.”

But the host is quite capable of repelling aggression.[Pg 275] “I hope you will bring Elton,” he says, with courteous calmness; “but I will not trouble you to give any other invitation.”

Oh, he need not be afraid of delegating power to her. She is no young lady on preferment. Married women may be safely authorised. It is her party. Leave it all to her; she will invite the guests.

“No,” he calmly replies; “there is but one married woman in the world whom I can allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell, and that one is——”

“Mrs. Weston, I suppose?” interrupts the mortified Mrs. Elton.

“No—Mrs. Knightley; and till she is in being I will manage matters myself.”

Was ever rebuff better given, with equal judgment and moderation? In spite of her pushing self-assertion Mrs. Elton has to subside into a mere guest, with the comfort, however, of telling everybody that she has originated the party—that Knightley has given it to gratify her.

Mrs. Elton has insisted it is to be a morning scheme—quite a simple thing. She is to wear a large bonnet, and bring one of her little baskets hanging on her arm. They are to walk about the gardens, and gather the strawberries themselves, sit under trees, and have a table spread in the shade—everything as natural and simple as possible. Is not that his idea?

“Not quite;” he puts down her officiousness and affectation with quiet, well-bred humour. His idea of the simple and the natural would be to have the table spread in the dining-room; when they were tired of eating strawberries in the garden, there should be cold meat in the house.

She wishes she had a donkey, the thing would be for them all to come on donkeys—Jane, Miss Bates, and herself, with her cara sposa walking by. In country life a donkey is a sort of necessary; in summer there is dust and in winter there is dirt.

No doubt Mr. Knightley keeps his countenance[Pg 276] while he assures her Donwell Lane is never dusty, and at that season of the year it is dry. “Come on a donkey, however, if you prefer it; you can borrow Mrs. Cole’s.”

One reason for Mr. Knightley’s declining to make his guests dine out of doors is, that he hopes to persuade Mr. Woodhouse to accompany Emma; and Mr. Woodhouse, who has not been at Donwell for two years, is open to persuasion.

In fact, everybody accepts his or her invitation, and as happy events—like sad ones—do not come singly, the lame horse recovers, so the party to Donwell is settled for the one day and the excursion to Box Hill for the next.

Mr. Weston, in the innocence of his heart, proposes to get his son Frank over from Richmond to attend both parties, and Mr. Knightley is obliged to say he will be glad to see the young man.

On a bright June day Mr. Woodhouse is safely driven over in the carriage, with one window down, to join in the al fresco party, by sitting in one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey where a fire has burnt all the morning, with Mrs. Weston to bear him company.

The few words representing Donwell Abbey have the usual effect of Jane Austen’s spare but graphic, and perfectly unaffected, unlaboured descriptions. The house and grounds, under the brooding heat of the midsummer day, lie before us. The Abbey is an ample and irregular building, low-lying, with all the old neglect of “prospect,” but having abundance of “timber” in rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extravagance has rooted up. There are extensive gardens, stretching down to meadows washed by a stream. We can understand Emma Woodhouse’s “honest pride and complacency” in her connection with the present and future proprietor of Donwell Abbey.

There is an unaccountable delay in the arrival of Frank Churchill, who was to have come on horseback, and some fears as to his horse are entertained.

[Pg 277]

In the meantime Mrs. Elton picks strawberries and talks for everybody—not excepting Miss Bates.

At last, when the various groups are resting on the seats in the shade, Emma cannot help overhearing Mrs. Elton urging on Jane Fairfax the acceptance of a situation as governess, offered to her through the Sucklings of Maple Grove.

Miss Fairfax is replying that she cannot fix on any arrangement till the return of the Campbells from Ireland.

Mrs. Elton is declining to be put off, and insisting on returning an answer in the affirmative by the next post.

Emma wonders how Jane can bear it, and even Jane looks vexed, speaks pointedly, and proposes to walk farther.

It is hot, and insensibly the company gather under the “delicious” shelter of a short avenue of limes, stretching beyond the gardens, and leading to nothing, unless to a view over a low stone wall, with high pillars, giving the appearance of an approach to the house where none had ever existed. The author objects to the sham, but expatiates—for her—on the view:—the distant bank, well clothed with wood—the Abbey Mill Farm, and its meadows—the river, making a curve around them. Jane Austen adds the short, significant sentence:—“It was a sweet view—sweet to the eye and mind. English verdure, English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright without being oppressive.”

In this walk, Emma is amused to find Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith leading the way. It is an odd tête-à-tête, but Emma is glad to see it, and to meet Mr. Knightley’s smile when she joins the couple, and finds him giving Harriet information on modes of agriculture. The smile seems to say—“These are my own concerns. I have a right to talk on such subjects, without being suspected of introducing Robert Martin.”

The cold repast is over, and still Frank Churchill does not put in an appearance. His father and mother are anxious, but take refuge in attributing his absence[Pg 278] to some nervous attack of his aunt’s. Emma looks at Harriet. That young lady is learning self-restraint; she behaves very well, betraying no emotion.

The party go out again to see some old fish-ponds, and, perhaps, to get as far as the clover, which is to be cut to-morrow.

Emma makes up her mind to remain indoors with her father. He has been very well entertained hitherto with the books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos and shells brought out of the cabinets for his amusement. He has shown them all to Mrs. Weston; he will show them over again to Emma. The occupation is not so engrossing to Emma as to her father; she strolls into the hall, where she meets Jane Fairfax, coming quickly from the gardens, with a look of escape about her.

Jane hurriedly begs Emma to make her excuses if she should be missed. It is late. She ought to be at home. She does not want to say anything about going to give trouble. But will Miss Woodhouse kindly say, when the others come in, that she is gone?

Certainly, Emma says; but she remonstrates on Jane Fairfax’s walking to Highbury alone.

It will not hurt her; she walks fast; she will be at home in twenty minutes.

Emma, who never forgets what is due to herself and others when she can render her neighbour a service, offers her father’s servant; wishes to order the Hartfield carriage.

“Thank you, thank you!” Jane says, but resolutely declines, adding with agitation, “For me to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who may so soon have to guard others.”

Emma’s really kind heart is touched. She entreats to be allowed to lend the carriage, and urges that the heat is cause sufficient, since Jane is fatigued already.

Some of the bonds which fetter Jane’s spirit give way; she and Emma are nearer being friends at that moment than they have ever been before. Jane confides so far in her companion: “I am fatigued,” she owns,[Pg 279] “but it is not the sort of fatigue—quick walking will refresh me. Miss Woodhouse, we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits. Mine, I confess, are exhausted. The greatest kindness you can show me will be to let me have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.”

Emma has not another word to say, and is full of commiseration, when the words that burst from Jane at parting, “Oh! Miss Woodhouse, the comfort of being sometimes alone!” betray the continued endurance the poor girl has to practise, even with some of those who love her best.

Jane has not been gone for a quarter of an hour, and Emma and her father have only reached the views of St. Mark’s Place, Venice, when Frank Churchill enters the room. His father and mother were right. A nervous seizure which had attacked Mrs. Churchill was the cause of his delay. He had almost given up the idea of coming, and if he had known how late he must be, and what he should have to suffer from the heat of the weather, he would not have started.

This is not like a speech which could come from the gallant Frank Churchill; but he continues to rail at the heat and at his own sufferings—sitting at the greatest possible distance from the small remnant of Mr. Weston’s fire, and looking deplorable—though Emma takes it upon her to assure him, somewhat exasperatingly, perhaps, that he will soon be cooler if he will sit still.

As soon as he is cooler he will go back again. He could ill be spared, only such a point had been made of his coming. They will all be going presently. He has met one of the party as he came—madness in such weather.

Emma can come to no other conclusion than that Frank Churchill is out of humour. Some people are always cross when they are hot. Eating and drinking often cures such incidental complaints. She obligingly recommends him to take some refreshment, and points out the dining-room door.

No, he is not hungry; eating would only make him[Pg 280] hotter; but he thinks better of it and goes off, muttering something about spruce beer.[60]

Emma is glad she has done being in love with him; but Harriet has a sweet temper.

He comes back with his good manners, if not his good spirits, restored, enters into the Woodhouses’ occupation, but announces, apropos of sketches and Switzerland, that he hopes soon to go abroad. He wants a change. He is sick of England.

He is sick of prosperity, his lively companion tells him; but she does not think he is so miserable as when he arrived. Let him eat and drink a little more. Another slice of cold meat, another draught of madeira and water, and he will do very well.

No, he will sit by her; she is his best cure.

They are going to Box Hill to-morrow. It is not Switzerland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want of a change.

No, certainly not; he will go home in the cool of the evening.

But he may come back again in the cool of the morning.

No, it would not be worth while. If he came he would be cross.

Then pray let him stay at Richmond.

But if he does, he will be crosser still. He could never bear to think of them all enjoying themselves without him.

He must settle these difficulties, and choose his own degree of crossness. She will press him no more.

Chaff was not a slang word early in the century. But how charmingly Jane Austen can chaff by the lips of more than one of her heroines! And what arch, sweet, perfectly womanly and ladylike chaff it is!

Frank Churchill[61] is very wrong, and yet there is a[Pg 281] grain of excuse for him when he says to Emma at parting, “Well, if you wish me to stay and join the party, I will.”

Emma smiles her acceptance of the concession, very nearly as indefensibly.

There is another fine day for Box Hill; but though the scenery is much admired, the excursion somehow is not successful.

There is a want of spirit and a want of union which cannot be got over. The Eltons walk by themselves, Mr. Knightley takes charge of Miss Bates and Jane Fairfax, Frank Churchill escorts Emma and Harriet. Mr. Weston tries in vain to bring everybody together, and make the thing harmonious.

At first it is downright dulness to Emma, for Frank Churchill is actually stupid, and, of course, Harriet is no better. They are both insufferable. It would have been well if they had continued dull, though Emma flatters herself it is a great deal better when they all sit down together, and Frank grows talkative and gay, making Emma his first object; while she, glad to be enlivened, and not sorry to be flattered, affords him every encouragement, in forgetfulness, it must be confessed, of what Harriet’s feelings may be. But then Harriet is the most placid of human beings, the most confiding of friends.

Emma means nothing: she even believes that he means nothing; but in the opinion of most people present only one English word, “flirtation,” could describe their behaviour. “Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse flirted together excessively” might be the report sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another. Yet it is really because Emma is less—not more—happy than usual, that she lays herself open to the imputation.

Frank Churchill piles up his compliments, and Emma parries them merrily. The rest of the company fall into silence, as if to constitute themselves an audience for the genteel comedy, until Emma objects aloud to[Pg 282] talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.

“They shall talk,” Frank ordains. “Ladies and gentlemen, I am desired by Miss Woodhouse to say that she desires to know what you are all thinking of?”

There is a little flutter of amusement here, and indignation there.

Mr. Knightley’s answer is most distinct, and most to the purpose: “Is Miss Woodhouse sure she would like to hear what we are all thinking of?”

“Oh, no! no!” cries Emma, laughing as carelessly as she can; “upon no account in the world. Let me hear anything rather than what you are thinking of.”

“It will not do,” whispers Frank to Emma; “they are most of them affronted. I will attack them with more address. Ladies and gentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say that she waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requires something very entertaining, from each of you, in a general way. Here are seven of you besides myself (who, she is pleased to say, am very entertaining already), and she only demands from each of you either one thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original or repeated; or two things moderately clever; or three things very dull indeed; and she engages to laugh heartily at them all.”

“Oh, very well,” exclaims Miss Bates; “then I need not be uneasy. ‘Three things very dull indeed!’ That will just do for me, you know. I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth, sha’n’t I?” (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence on everybody’s assent). “Do not you all think I shall?”

Emma cannot resist. “Ah, ma’am, but there may be a difficulty. Pardon me, but you will be limited as to the number—only three at once.”

Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of the manner, does not immediately catch the meaning; but[Pg 283] when it bursts on her, it cannot anger, though a slight blush shows that it can pain her.

“Ah! well, to be sure! Yes, I see what she means,” turning to Mr. Knightley, “and I will try to hold my tongue. I must make myself very disagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend.”

Mr. Weston volunteers a conundrum, which is not very clever, but which he is sure Emma will not guess. “What two letters stand for perfection?—‘M’ and ‘A’—Em—ma.”

It may be a very indifferent piece of wit, but Emma finds a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it.

Mr. Knightley says, gravely, “This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr. Weston has done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up everybody else. Perfection should not have come quite so soon.”

Mrs. Elton is swelling with resentment. “I really cannot attempt—I am not at all fond of the sort of thing. I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I must really be allowed to judge when to speak, and when to hold my tongue. Pass us, if you please, Mr. Churchill! pass Mr. E., Knightley, Jane, and myself. We have nothing clever to say—not one of us?”

“Yes, yes, pray pass me,” adds her husband, with a sort of sneering consciousness. “I have nothing to say that can entertain Miss Woodhouse, or any other young lady. An old married man—quite good for nothing. Shall we walk, Augusta?”

“With all my heart. I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot. Come, Jane, take my other arm.”

Jane declines, and the husband and wife walk off.

“Happy couple!” says Frank Churchill, as soon as they are out of hearing; “how well they suit one another! Very lucky, marrying, as they did, upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place. They only knew each other, I think, a few weeks, at Bath.”[Pg 284] Then, suddenly becoming serious, he volunteers his emphatic opinion that there can be no knowledge of a person’s disposition in such circumstances, finishing with the sentence, “How many a man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the rest of his life!”

Jane Fairfax wishes to speak. “Such things do occur, undoubtedly.” She is stopped by a cough.

“You were speaking?” said Frank Churchill.

She recovers her voice. “I was only going to observe that though such unfortunate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot imagine them to be very frequent. A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise, but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards. I would be understood to mean that it can be only weak, irresolute characters (whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance) who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience, an oppression for ever.”

He makes no answer, merely looks and bows in submission, then resumes his flirtation with Emma, more furiously than before. Will she choose a wife for him? He is sure he will like anybody fixed on by her. He is in no hurry. Emma may adopt her, educate her.

“And make her like myself!” cries the heedless Emma.

By all means, if she can.

She undertakes the commission in high glee. He shall have a charming wife.

He only stipulates for two things. She must be lively, and she must have hazel eyes. He will go abroad for a couple of years, and when he returns he will come to her for a wife.

This jesting commission appeals to Emma’s special weakness. Will not Harriet be the very creature described—barring the liveliness and the hazel eyes—either sops of personal flattery thrown in for Emma herself, whose appetite for that commodity is not small, or words[Pg 285] spoken at random? Might not Harriet be in his thoughts when he referred the education of his wife to Emma?

“Now, ma’am,” said Jane to her aunt, “shall we join Mrs. Elton?”

Miss Bates is ready, so is Mr. Knightley; it seems, to use a homely expression, that their absence will be better than their company.

Yet, after the rest of the party are gone, the pitch to which the young man’s spirits rise becomes almost unpleasant to Emma. She is fairly tired of fun and flattery. She welcomes the appearance of the servants and the ordering of the carriages.

But Emma is not to escape without the rebuke she deserves. She finds Mr. Knightley seeking to speak with her where nobody can hear. He says, “‘Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do—a privilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps; but I must still use it. I cannot see you acting wrong without a remonstrance. How could you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates? How could you be so insolent in your wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation? Emma, I had not thought it possible.’

“Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off. ‘Nay, how could I help saying what I did? Nobody could have helped it. It was not so very bad. I daresay she did not understand me.’

“‘I assure you she did. She felt your full meaning. She has talked of it since. I wish you could have heard how she talked of it—with what candour and generosity. I wish you could have heard her honouring your forbearance, in being able to pay her such attentions as she was for ever receiving from yourself and your father, when her society must be so irksome.’

“‘Oh!’ cried Emma, ‘I know there is not a better creature in the world; but you must allow that what is good and what is ridiculous are most unfortunately blended in her.’

“‘They are blended,’ said he, ‘I acknowledge, and[Pg 286] were she prosperous I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over the good. Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave her every harmless absurdity to take its chance. I would not quarrel with you for any liberties of manner. Were she equal in situation—but, Emma, consider how far this is from being the case. She is poor; she has sunk from the comforts she was born to; and if she live to old age must probably sink more. Her situation should secure your compassion. It was badly done, indeed! You, whom she had known from an infant, whom she had seen grow up from a period when her notice was an honour—to have you now, in thoughtless spirits, and the pride of the moment, laugh at her, humble her—and before her niece, too, and before others, many of whom (certainly some) would be entirely guided by your treatment of her. This is not pleasant to you, Emma, and it is very far from pleasant to me; but I must, I will, tell you truths while I can; satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel, and trusting that you will, some time or other, do me greater justice than you can do now.’”

Nothing can be juster, manlier, more faithful than the remonstrance. It goes straight to Emma’s heart. Mr. Knightley is quite mistaken in imagining that she cannot appreciate it at its true worth. In the middle of her contrition and distress, she is eager to show him that she feels no sullenness. Not the least of her vexation is occasioned by her having failed, in the hurry of the moment, to acknowledge the true friendship of his tone, and by their having exchanged no friendly leave-taking.

How could she have been so brutal, so cruel to Miss Bates; how could she have exposed herself to such an ill opinion in any one she valued, and then to suffer him to go without one word of gratitude and common kindness?

Truly, Emma is candid, good, and gracious, in spite of her worst faults, when these are contrasted with the intolerable flippancy, the selfish heartlessness of some[Pg 287] so-called heroines. We are sorry for her as she drives away with Harriet, the tears stealing down Emma’s cheeks in the comparative privacy of such companionship.

That scene at Box Hill, with its lights and shades, its apparent comedy and hidden tragedy, its diversity of characters and feelings so finely indicated, is the best in the book.

“Who breaks—pays.” Emma has, next morning, as the inevitable result of her regardless folly the day before, to face a host of wretched reflections. Girl-like, she is in haste to atone, as if atonement were always easy or possible. She will go that very day to the Bateses, and, though she cannot speak out her compunction, she will, from this time henceforth, do all that is in her power to make up for her offence, by lavishing friendly kindness on the family.

She fears for a moment she is to be refused admittance, but it is only Jane Fairfax who is retreating from the visitor. The mother and daughter are as civil and humble as usual, though it pains Emma to recognise, at first, that Miss Bates is less cheerful and easy in her volubility.

But Emma’s special friendliness soon reconciles the good old lady to herself and all the world. Emma hears the present trouble poured forth in the usual jumble of ideas and sentences. The substance is that Jane has suddenly made up her mind to accept the situation Mrs. Elton hunted up for her.

Emma is sincerely interested, and sorry for them all, and expresses her feelings earnestly.

“So very kind,” replies the grateful Miss Bates, “but you are always kind.”

This is certainly heaping coals of fire on Emma’s head. She hastens to ask where Miss Fairfax is going.

“To Mrs. Smallridge—charming woman—to have the charge of three little girls—delightful children.”

Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove; but unfortunately Mrs. Smallridge is in a great hurry, and Jane is to leave in a fortnight.

[Pg 288]

On Emma’s return home, she finds Mr. Knightley with her father, looking in upon him before leaving for London, and wishing to learn if they have any messages for John and Isabella, with whom he is going to spend a few days.

Emma had not heard of the visit, though Mr. Knightley says he had been thinking of it for some time; and she is certain he has not forgiven her, he looks so unlike himself.

As they stand talking, Mr. Woodhouse begins to inquire for Mrs. Bates and her daughter, with whom Emma has been—she is so attentive to them.

At this peculiarly mal apropos praise, Emma’s colour rises, while she looks at Mr. Knightley and shakes her head.

It seems as if he instantly understands all that has been passing in her heart. He looks at her with a glow of regard, he takes her hand—she is not sure afterwards that she did not offer it, but he takes it, presses it, and is certainly on the point of carrying it to his lips, when, from some fancy or other, he suddenly lets it go.

He would have judged better, she thinks, if he had not stopped, but she can at least recall the attempt with great satisfaction. It speaks such perfect amity. The next moment he is gone.

The following day brings news from Richmond which throws everything else into the shade. An express had arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs. Churchill. The great Mrs. Churchill (the tyrannical rich woman who has demanded such deference from both husband and nephew) is no more.

Jane Austen has a most pertinent reflection on the event and some of its consequences. “It was felt as such things must be felt. Everybody had a degree of gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the departed, solicitude for the surviving friends; and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where she would be buried. Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she[Pg 289] stoops to be disagreeable, it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill fame. Mrs. Churchill, after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was now spoken of with compassionate allowances. In one point she was fully justified. She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill. The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints.”

Emma soon begins to consider that now an attachment on Frank’s part to Harriet Smith will have nothing to encounter.

Mr. Churchill, independent of his wife, is feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man—to be persuaded into anything by his nephew.

Harriet again behaves admirably, and betrays no agitation. Emma is delighted to have this evidence of her friend’s strengthened character.

In the interval, before anything can be known of Frank Churchill’s future, Emma longs to do the little she can to compensate for her neglect of Jane Fairfax, and for the idle, unworthy fancies of which she begins to feel thoroughly ashamed. But Jane is not so accessible to advances as her aunt is. Emma would have Jane spend a day at Hartfield before she quits Highbury, and writes to invite her. The invitation is refused, and a message sent that “Miss Fairfax is not well enough to write.”

Mr. Perry, in visiting the Woodhouses, confirms the accounts of Jane Fairfax’s illness. She is seriously indisposed, suffering from headaches, with nervous fever, and her appetite is gone. He doubts the possibility of her going to Mrs. Smallridge’s at the time fixed. He is uneasy about Jane Fairfax, though there are no absolutely alarming symptoms. Her present home is unfavourable to a nervous disorder.

Emma’s regrets and self-reproaches increase. She is eager to be useful; she writes again, with the greatest tact and feeling she can command, and proposes to take Jane for a drive, at any hour she will name.

Once more a verbal message is returned:—“Miss[Pg 290] Fairfax’s compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to any exercise.”

Emma thinks her note deserves more, but cannot be angry under the circumstances. She would have tried personal persuasion, but only Miss Bates comes to the carriage door to excuse her niece.

Hearing of Mr. Perry’s recommendation of nourishing food, Emma returns home, and calling the housekeeper, despatches some arrowroot of very superior quality, with a most friendly note to Miss Bates. In half an hour the arrowroot is returned with a thousand thanks from Miss Bates, but “dear Jane” would not be satisfied till it was sent back. It is a thing she cannot take, and she insists on her aunt saying that her niece is not in want of anything.

Such obduracy is unconquerable, and when Emma hears that Jane Fairfax had been wandering about the meadows at some distance from Highbury on the afternoon of the day on which she declined carriage exercise, Emma is forced to see that Jane is resolved to receive no kindness from her. She is sorry and mortified, but she has the comfort of thinking Mr. Knightley would have understood and appreciated her motives.

Ten days after Mrs. Churchill’s death, Mr. Weston comes himself one morning to Hartfield to beg Emma to accompany him to Randalls. Mrs. Weston is not ill, but she has something very particular to say to her friend. He will not tell beforehand what has happened, but on the road he is led into such explanations as “The most unaccountable business;” “she will break it to you better than I can.”

At the last words Emma stops short in terror. Something must have happened in Brunswick Square (where Isabella lives). Which of them is it? She must hear at once.

It is only on his solemnly assuring her that what has occurred has nothing to do with the name of Knightley that she is relieved, and walks on. “Who is that gentleman on horseback?” she asks, speaking[Pg 291] in order to keep up a conversation on indifferent topics.

It is one of the Otways. Not Frank. She will not see him. He is half way to Windsor by this time.

Has his son been with them, then?

Oh, yes! Did she not know? Well, never mind.

Mrs. Weston looks ill, and much disturbed, and no sooner is she left alone with Emma than the girl begs affectionately to be informed what unpleasant event has befallen her friends.

“Have you no idea?” said Mrs. Weston, in a trembling voice.

Emma does guess it has to do with Mr. Frank Churchill.

She is right, Mrs. Weston confesses, resuming her work, and fixing her eyes upon it. He had been there that morning on a most extraordinary errand. He came to speak to his father—to announce an attachment.

Emma thinks first of herself and then of Harriet.

“More than an attachment—a positive engagement. What will you say, Emma, what will anybody say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged—nay, that they have been long engaged?”

Emma even jumped with surprise and consternation. Jane Fairfax! Mrs. Weston is not serious. She does not mean it?

“You may well be amazed,” returns Mrs. Weston, steadily averting her eyes; “you may well be amazed.”

There had been a solemn engagement between them ever since October, formed at Weymouth, and kept a secret from everybody, not a creature knowing it but themselves, neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.

Emma scarcely hears what is said. Her mind is divided between two overwhelming ideas—her own former conversations with him about Jane Fairfax, and poor Harriet. “Well,” she exclaims at last, “this is a circumstance I must think of at least half a day before I can comprehend it. What! engaged to her all the winter, before either of them came to Highbury?”

[Pg 292]

“It has hurt me very much,” said Mrs. Weston; “it has hurt his father equally; some part of his conduct we cannot excuse.”

Emma cannot pretend to misunderstand the speaker’s meaning. On the contrary, she is eager and glad to remove this load from the Westons’ minds. In a few words she explains that Frank Churchill’s attentions to her have not produced the effect his father and mother feared. It seems too good news to be true; but Emma confirms her assertions of indifference by owning there was a time when she did like him, but that time soon passed—why, she cannot tell, and she has not cared about him for the last three months.

Mrs. Weston kisses her, and cries with joy and thankfulness. On this point she and her husband have been wretched. They had warmly wished the match, and heartily believed in a mutual attachment. They have been miserable on Emma’s account.

Emma is grateful for her escape, but she is by no means inclined to excuse the offender. She turns, with her usual frankness and fervour, to protest against his conduct. “What right had he to come among us with affections and faith engaged, and manners so very disengaged? What right had he to endeavour to please—as he certainly did—to distinguish any young woman, as he certainly did, while he really belonged to another? How could she bear such behaviour? Composure, with a witness! to look on while repeated attentions were offering to another woman before her face, and not resent it.”

Now that Mrs. Weston’s mind is so agreeably relieved, she seeks to find an apology for the delinquents.

Emma will not even listen to a reminder of his many good qualities. “Mrs. Smallridge, too!” she is exclaiming; “Jane actually on the point of going as governess! What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy? To suffer her to engage herself—to suffer her even to think of such a measure!”

[Pg 293]

But Mrs. Weston is able to clear her stepson on this point—he knew nothing of it. There had been misunderstandings. Jane had taken a private resolution, which had somehow come round to Frank only the day before; it had determined him to come forward at once, own all to his uncle, and throw himself on his kindness. Had Mrs. Churchill lived there could hardly have been a hope of the family’s consent; with her influence gone everything had been easy. Frank was off with the morning light to Highbury, went straight to the Bateses, and then came on to his father’s. He had to return immediately to his uncle, but was to write in full to his stepmother.

Emma remarks dryly, she supposes they will immediately get reconciled to the idea, and she wishes the couple happy. But she will always think it a very abominable system of hypocrisy, deceit, espionage, and treachery. They must take the consequence, if they have heard each other spoken of in a way not perfectly agreeable.

Mrs. Weston congratulates herself that she has always thought so highly of Jane Fairfax, she can never have said ill of her to Frank.

Emma, smarting under her own consciousness, can only say her friend is in luck. But she is able to set worthy Mr. Weston’s mind at rest at once, by congratulating him, without the smallest difficulty, on having the loveliest and most accomplished young woman in England for his daughter-in-law.

“Harriet! poor Harriet!” There is the next torment. How is Emma to break such news a second time to her friend? Mr. Knightley’s words begin to sound prophetic—“Emma, you have been no friend to Harriet Smith.”

There is no necessity for farther solicitude on Jane Fairfax’s behalf. Her days of insignificance and evil are over. Now Emma can comprehend why her late offers of assistance and regard have been repulsed. In Jane’s eyes she has been a successful rival. In that[Pg 294] light an airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack, and arrowroot from the Hartfield store-room must have proved poison.

But Harriet. Frank Churchill’s engagement is to be still kept a strict secret during the family’s period of mourning for Mrs. Churchill; however, there must be an explanation, on Harriet’s account.

Emma is reflecting Mrs. Weston’s agitation on her own behalf, when Harriet comes in, with the eager exclamation, “Is not this the oddest news that ever was about Jane Fairfax?” Mr. Weston has told her as the greatest secret. “How very odd!”

Harriet’s behaviour is so extremely odd, that Emma does not know what to make of it. She may spare her pity, if Harriet’s self-command has reached this height. Harriet is even asking, with the utmost coolness, if Miss Woodhouse had ever guessed that Mr. Frank Churchill was in love with Miss Fairfax?

“Never!” protests Emma; “you may be sure of that. If I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly.”

“Me!” cries Harriet, colouring; “why should you caution me? You do not think that I care about Mr. Frank Churchill?”

If it is not Frank, who can it be? Is Emma to suppose——?

But Harriet is quite ready to explain herself in the middle of her agitation. They have agreed not to name him; but he is so infinitely superior to everybody else, that Harriet does not see how she could have been thought to mean any other person. Mr. Frank Churchill, indeed! Harriet does not know who would look at him in the presence of the other. And she has received the encouragement from Emma herself, when it would have seemed too much presumption almost, to dare to think of him—that more wonderful things had happened—there had been matches of greater disparity.

“Harriet,” cries Emma, “let us understand each other now, without the possibility of further mistake—are you speaking of Mr. Knightley?”

[Pg 295]

To be sure she is—she never could have an idea of anybody else.

Emma brings herself to ask, has Harriet any idea of Mr. Knightley’s returning her affection?

“Yes,” replies Harriet modestly, but not fearfully, “I must say I have.”

Emma is silent, in the bitterness of her heart. Why is it so much worse that Harriet should be in love with Mr. Knightley than with Mr. Churchill? Why is the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet’s having some hope of a return of her love? There can only be one explanation—it darts through Emma’s mind with the swiftness of an arrow’s flight—Mr. Knightley must marry no one but herself.

Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, lies bare before her. How inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling has been her behaviour! And if she has acted improperly by Harriet, she may have done still worse by Mr. Knightley. He had said she had been no friend to Harriet Smith. She may prove to have been his worst enemy, if it be possible that his association with Harriet can bring him to demean himself to make a girl, so inferior to him in every respect, his wife.

But Emma must not make Harriet suffer for her fault. Emma is always courageous in taking upon herself the heaviest penalty for her misdoings.

She gently questions Harriet as to her reason, besides the assurance Emma has given her, under a misconception, of Mr. Knightley’s growing regard for her. And as Harriet, with great naïveté, brings forward the different proofs—from his dancing with her at the ball at the Crown, down to his seeking her out, and walking with her at his own party at Donwell, including the change in his tone, his increased kindness, the pains he takes to ascertain her opinions in conversation, even to an effort to discover whether her affections are still disengaged, Emma, sick at heart, is compelled to admit there is some truth in what Harriet alleges. Emma[Pg 296] herself has been struck with the additional notice which Mr. Knightley bestows on Harriet Smith, and several times lately he has praised her cordially to Emma.

If one could go so far as to conceive Mr. Knightley choosing a partner for life so inferior to him in understanding, as well as in every other desirable recommendation, then it might be that he would marry Harriet, though the vision of her as the mistress of Donwell Abbey humbles Emma for its master’s sake even more than for her own. If she had only not brought the two together; if she had but left Harriet to marry the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy in the line of life to which she belonged—in which she ought to have remained. Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith! It is a union to distance every wonder of the kind. The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax becomes commonplace and threadbare—presents no disparity by comparison. Such elevation on Harriet’s side—such debasement on Mr. Knightley’s. It is impossible. And yet it is very far from impossible. Is it a new circumstance for a man of first-rate abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers? Is it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who will seek him?

Still Emma can be honourably fair to Harriet, and gentle with her. But she does faintly suggest that Mr. Knightley may be paying attention to Harriet with Mr. Martin’s interest in view.

But Harriet rejects the suggestion with such spirit—she hopes she knows better now than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be suspected of it—and so holds Emma to her former advice to observe the gentleman’s behaviour, and let it be the rule of hers (Harriet’s); that, though it requires a great exertion, Emma brings herself to say Mr. Knightley is the last man in the world who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling more for her than he really did.

In return for the guarded speech, Harriet could have worshipped her reluctant friend.

[Pg 297]

Emma seeks to weigh her regard for Mr. Knightley—to ascertain its beginning and strength. Till she was threatened with its loss, she had never known how much her happiness was dependent upon him. She had long been first with him, for there was only Isabella to compete with her in his affections; and she had been aware that she came before her sister with him. She had known she was dear to him; and in her self-confident security, and her delusions and fancies, she had never so much as suspected that to be first and dearest with Mr. Knightley, or to have another woman supplant her, constituted the fulness or the blankness, the gladness or the sadness, of her lot.

Tried as Emma is, her good sense does not forsake her; she will not believe in her own and Mr. Knightley’s loss, so long as unbelief is possible. To continue to discuss the matter with Harriet is intolerable. She contrives to keep Harriet away from Hartfield.

A visit from Mrs. Weston is a distraction to Emma’s cares, though it is no longer of the importance it would have been before the last miserable discovery.

Mrs. Weston comes with the news of the Westons’ visit to the Bateses. Very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady, while the innocent satisfaction and delight of her grandmother and aunt had been almost touching.

Jane Fairfax had spoken with energy to Mrs. Weston on the misery she had suffered during the concealment for so many months. This was one of her expressions:—“I will not say that since I have entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments, but I can say that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour.”[62]

She had added:—“After all the punishment that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct. The fortunate turn that everything has taken, and the kindness I am now receiving, is what my conscience tells me[Pg 298] ought not to be. Do not imagine, madam, that I was taught wrong. I shall dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell.”

Emma is softened. “Poor girl! her affection must have overpowered her judgment.”

Mrs. Weston’s communications increase Emma’s esteem, compassion, and sense of past injustice to Jane Fairfax. To all her other regrets and sources of self-reproach is added the sense of having missed, by a feeling of jealousy, the friendship with Jane—marked out by equality of birth, abilities, and education, which all her friends had proposed for her, and which might have been of benefit to both girls. Instead, Emma had preferred the unsuitable, humble companionship and worship of Harriet Smith; and what has come of it?

V.
A cold, stormy rain sets in, stripping the July trees and shrubs. Mr. Woodhouse, whose spirits are easily affected by the weather, is more than usually dependent on cheering, at the very time that visitors fail. Emma, struggling to do a loving daughter’s part, cannot prevent herself from foreseeing how much more deserted Hartfield must soon prove. Mrs. Weston’s baby will engross her, and supersede even Emma in her friend’s affections. Both Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax will be gone from Highbury; and—far worst change of all, Mr. Knightley will be no longer walking in at all hours, when he has Harriet to keep him company at Donwell. And if he can be content with Harriet, only one reflection can increase Emma’s wretchedness—that it has been all her own work.

The rainy clouds clear away the following afternoon, and Emma seizes the opportunity of Mr. Perry’s calling and sitting with her father, to stroll out into the[Pg 299] shrubbery—where the first thing she sees is Mr. Knightley passing the garden gate and coming towards her. She had not heard of his return from London, but she must be collected and calm. (Emma is a girl who possesses much self-respect and womanly dignity.)

Mr. Knightley, on his side, does not look cheerful; but he is perfectly capable of conversing quietly, as he turns and walks with her.

Emma fancies that he wishes to talk to her of Harriet, and shrinks from leading the way in the conversation, but braces herself to follow when he takes the initiative. It is only his recurring fits of silence she cannot bear.

She considers; tries to smile, and refers to some news for him to hear, which ought to surprise him.

If she means Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, he has heard that already, he tells her shortly.

Emma is relieved, but as she reminds him that he had once tried to give her a caution, and she wishes she had attended to it, her voice sinks and she sighs, adding, “I seem doomed to blindness.”

She suddenly finds her arm drawn within his and pressed, and hears him fairly faltering, “Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound—the feelings of the warmest friendship—indignation—abominable scoundrel!”

Emma[63] must undeceive him instantly.

“You are very kind, but you are mistaken. I am not in want of that sort of compassion. I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures; but I have no other reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier.”

“Emma,” he cries eagerly, “are you indeed——” but checking himself, “No, no. I understand you: forgive me. I am pleased that you can even say so much. He[Pg 300] is no object of regret. I could only be certain there was a preference. He is a disgrace to the name of man, and is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman?”

Emma has to renew her protestations, striving for the old liveliness to carry off her sense of awkwardness.

“I am in a very extraordinary situation. I cannot let you continue in your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression, I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse. But I never have.”

Her companion says nothing, and Emma, to convince him, recapitulates earnestly the true particulars of the case—Frank’s being the son of Mr. Weston, his having been continually at Hartfield; the fact that his attentions flattered her, even after she had come to look on them as a habit, a trick, nothing that had called for seriousness on her part. He had imposed on her, still he had not taken her in, in the serious meaning of the words.

Mr. Knightley grows cooler, and admits he may have underrated Frank Churchill. With such a woman he has a chance. He is a fortunate man, at three-and-twenty to have drawn a prize. Everything turns out well for him. “He meets with a young woman at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary her by negligent treatment; and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him, they could not have found her superior. His aunt is in the way. His aunt dies. He has only to speak; his friends are eager to promote his happiness. He has used everybody ill, and they are all delighted to forgive him.”

“You speak as if you envied him,” exclaims Emma.

“And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is the object of my envy.”

Emma can say no more; they seem within half a[Pg 301] sentence of Harriet. Emma wishes to change the subject, and speaks of the children in Brunswick Square.

But he is too fast for her. “You will not ask me what is the point of envy. Emma, I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid the next moment.”

“Oh, then don’t speak of it; don’t speak of it,” she cries impulsively; “take a little time; consider; don’t commit yourself.”

“Thank you!” he said, in a tone of deep mortification.

Emma cannot bear to give him pain. He is wishing, perhaps, to consult her. She may help him; give just praise to Harriet, represent to him his independence.

Emma refuses to go in, and as they take another turn, says hurriedly, “I stopped you ungraciously just now, Mr. Knightley; but if you have any wish to speak to me openly, as a friend, you may command me. I will hear whatever you like, I will tell you exactly what I think.”

“As a friend,” repeats Mr. Knightley. No, he has no wish. But why should he hesitate when he has gone too far for concealment? He accepts her offer as a friend. Will she tell him if he has any chance of ever succeeding? He stops to look the question, and the expression of his eyes overpowers her.

“My dearest Emma, for dearest you will always be to me, whatever the event of this hour’s conversation, tell me at once; say ‘no’ if it is to be said.”

She can really say nothing.

“‘You are silent,’ he cries, with great animation, ‘absolutely silent! at present I ask no more.’

“Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. The dread of being awakened from the happiest dream was perhaps the most prominent feeling.

“‘I cannot make speeches, Emma,’ he soon resumed, and in a tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible[Pg 302] tenderness as was tolerably convincing. ‘If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it more. But you know what I am; you hear nothing but truth from me. I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it. Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them. The manner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend them. God knows I have been a very indifferent lover. But you understand me. Yes, you see—you understand my feelings, and will return them if you can. At present I ask only to hear, once to hear your voice.’”

Emma’s mind is busy. Harriet’s hopes have been groundless—a delusion as complete as any of her own—and Emma rejoices that Harriet’s secret has not escaped her. “It was all the service she could now render her poor friend; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the more worthy of the two—or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive, because he could not marry them both, Emma had it not.” “She spoke then on being entreated. What did she say? Just what she ought, of course. A lady always does. She said enough to show there need not be despair, and to invite him to say more himself.”

“Mr. Knightley had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. He had come to see how she bore Frank Churchill’s engagement with no selfish view, the rest had been the work of a moment.

“Her change was equal. This one half-hour had given to each the same precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the same degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust. On his side there had been a long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the expectation, of Frank Churchill. He had been in love with Emma and jealous of Frank Churchill from about the same period, one sentiment having probably[Pg 303] enlightened him as to the other. It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the country. The Box Hill party had decided him on going away. He would save himself from witnessing again such permitted, encouraged attentions. He had gone to learn to be indifferent, but he had gone to a wrong place. There was too much domestic happiness in his brother’s house; woman wore too amiable a form in it. Isabella was too much like Emma, differing only in those striking inferiorities which always brought the other in brilliancy before him, for much to have been done, even had his time been longer. He had stayed on, however, vigorously, day after day, till this very morning’s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax. Then, with the gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel, having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma, was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could stay no longer. He had ridden home through the rain, and had walked up directly after dinner to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults, bore the discovery.

“He had found her agitated and low. Frank Churchill was a villain. He heard her declare that she had never loved him. Frank Churchill’s character was not desperate. She was his own Emma, by hand and word, when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow.” The concluding paragraph, in its mingled vivacity and satire, is peculiarly Jane Austen’s.

Emma had left the house for a little respite from suffering. She returns to it in an exquisite flutter of happiness. The reflections of a sleepless night tranquillise Emma’s feelings. Her gravest considerations are her father and Harriet, since Emma’s happiness by no means absolves her, in her own opinion, in that of her author, or in reality, from caring for others. She hardly knows yet what Mr. Knightley will ask; but a[Pg 304] very short parley with her own heart produces the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father. She even weeps at the idea of it, as a sin of thought. While he lives it must be only an engagement, which, she flatters herself, might become an additional comfort to him.

With regard to poor Harriet, Emma must still experience much bitter self-reproach and many sorrowful regrets. The best that Emma can devise for her friend, while still avoiding a meeting, and communicating what she has to tell by letter, is to procure for Harriet an invitation to visit Isabella. A few weeks spent in London will furnish some amusement.

Emma’s letter to Harriet, written the first thing before breakfast, is so hard a task that Mr. Knightley, in walking over to breakfast, does not come too soon. He has not left her long when a thick packet from Mrs. Weston encloses Frank Churchill’s promised explanation.

It is a good letter—appealing not unsuccessfully to the candour and indulgence of his reader. The writer dwells eloquently on all the difficulties which beset his devoted attachment to Miss Fairfax, so that if he had not persuaded her to stoop to a secret engagement, he must have gone mad. He confesses ingenuously what had really been the motive of his first visit to Highbury.

He admits that his attentions to Miss Woodhouse were partly for the purpose of assisting in the concealment of his real object. But he insists that, if he had not been convinced of her indifference, he would not have acted as he did. They seemed to understand each other. When he called to take leave of her, he had been on the verge of confessing the truth. He believes she had some suspicion of it. He remembers her telling him at the ball that he ought to be grateful to Mrs. Elton. His heart was in Highbury, and his business was to get his body there as often as might be, and with the least suspicion.

Of the piano so much talked of, he need not say that it was ordered entirely without the knowledge of Miss[Pg 305] Fairfax, who would never have allowed him to send it had any choice been given her. Afterwards he had behaved shamefully. Does Mrs. Weston remember the morning at Donwell? He was late. He met Miss Fairfax walking home by herself, and wanted to walk with her; but she would not suffer it. He had thought her over-cautious, even cold. He now saw she was perfectly right. “While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman, was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous precaution useless? Had we been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected. I was mad enough, however, to resent—I doubted her affection. I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill, when, provoked by such conduct on my side—such shameful, insolent neglect of her, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense to endure—she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me.”

Even then he was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time; but he went away, determined that she should make the first advances.

In the meantime she closed with the offer of a situation as governess; and wrote to him that, as she felt the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to each, she dissolved it.

The letter reached him on the very morning of his aunt’s death. He answered it within the hour, but in the confusion which followed, his answer, instead of being sent off with the many letters despatched that day, was locked up in his writing-desk, while he trusted that he had said enough, though in but a few lines, to satisfy her. He was surprised at getting no answer till he received a parcel—his own letters returned, with a note stating her surprise at not having heard from him in reply to her last letter, and begging him to forward her letters to Mrs. Smallridge’s, near Bristol.

[Pg 306]

He knew the name, the place, and instantly saw what she had been about. What was to be done? One thing only. He must speak to his uncle; without his sanction Frank could not hope to be listened to again. And Mr. Churchill, softened by the late event, was earlier reconciled than Frank could have ventured to expect.

Is Mrs. Weston disposed to pity Frank for having to plead his cause with so much at stake? She must not pity him till he reached Highbury, and saw how ill he had made her. He knew when to find her alone. A great deal of very reasonable—very just—displeasure he had to persuade away. But it was done; they were reconciled—dearer, much dearer, than ever.

The letter makes its way to Emma’s heart. Frank had been wrong, but he has suffered, and is very sorry; and he is so grateful to Mrs. Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and Emma is so happy herself, that there is no being severe. Could he have entered the room, she must have shaken hands as heartily as ever.

Emma knows Mrs. Weston will like Mr. Knightley to see the letter; and she herself is anxious that he should read it when he comes again. He wishes to take it home with him; but when he has to look over it then and there, he goes through it, supplying a running commentary of caustic, humorous remarks: “Playing a dangerous game,” he observes at one place; and when he comes to the piano, exclaims, “Ah! that was the act of a very young man—too young to consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure.” “I perfectly agree with you, sir,” Mr. Knightley echoes, “you did behave very shamefully.” “What a letter the man writes!” protests the lover, impatient on his own account.

“I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him,” interposes Emma.

“Well, there is feeling here,” admits Knightley. “He does seem to have suffered in finding her ill. He has had great faults—faults of inconsideration and[Pg 307] thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinion in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves; but still, as he is, beyond doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly with her, I am very ready to believe his character will be improved, and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principle it wants.”

But Mr. Knightley has something else to talk of. “And it is in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike English, such as Mr. Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with” that he introduces his subject, “how to be able to ask her to marry him, without attacking the happiness of her father.”

Emma’s answer is ready. She can never quit her father.

Mr. Knightley, unselfish in everything, feels this as strongly as herself. But his mind has been at work all the morning to overcome the obstacle. He had first hoped to induce Mr. Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; but Mr. Knightley’s knowledge of his future father-in-law’s habits soon convinced him that this step was impossible. Mr. Woodhouse taken from Hartfield! it ought not to be attempted. But Mr. Knightley’s next plan “he trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable: it was, that he should be received at Hartfield! that so long as her father’s happiness—in other words, his life—required Hartfield to continue her home, it should be his likewise.”

The last solution of the difficulty has never occurred to Emma. “She was sensible of all the affection it evinced. She felt that in quitting Donwell he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; that in living constantly with her father, and in no house of his own, there would be much—very much—to be borne with.[64] She promised to think of it, and advised him to think of it more; but he was[Pg 308] fully convinced that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject. He had given it, he could assure her, very long and calm consideration. He had been walking away from William Larkins the whole morning, to have his thoughts to himself.”

“Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for,” cried Emma. “I am sure William Larkins will not like it. You must get his consent before you ask mine.”

“She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised, moreover, to think of it with the intention of finding it a very good scheme.

“It is remarkable that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view in which she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never struck with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as heir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded.”

Emma would be too happy but for poor Harriet. “In time, of course, Mr. Knightley would be forgotten, that is, supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early. Mr. Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure; not like Mr. Elton. Mr. Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly considerate for everybody, would never deserve to be less worshipped than now; and it really was too much to hope, even of Harriet, that she could be in love with more than three men in one year.”

Mrs. Weston’s friends are made happy by the birth of a daughter to her. Emma and Mr. Knightley compare notes on Miss Weston’s education. He declares he is losing his bitterness against spoiled children; they are disagreeable in infancy, but correct themselves as they grow older.

Emma reminds him she had the advantage of his endeavours to qualify the indulgence of other people. It would be the greatest humanity if he would do as much for poor little Anna Weston, except fall in love with her when she is thirteen.

“How often when you were a girl,” he tells her,[Pg 309] “have you said to me with one of your saucy looks, ‘Mr. Knightley, I am going to do so and so; papa says I may,’ or ‘I have Miss Taylor’s leave;’ something which you knew I did not approve. In such cases my interference was giving two bad feelings instead of one.”

“‘What an amiable creature I was! No wonder you should hold my speeches in such affectionate remembrance.’

“‘Mr. Knightley, you always called me. Mr. Knightley, and from habit it has not so very formal a sound. And yet it is formal. I want you to call me something else, but I do not know what.’

“‘I remember once calling you George in one of my amiable fits, about ten years ago. I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as you made no objection, I never did it again.’

“‘And cannot you call me George now?’

“‘Impossible! I never can call you anything but Mr. Knightley. I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Elton by calling you Mr. K. But I will promise,’ she added presently, laughing and blushing, ‘I will promise to call you once by your Christian name. I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where: in the building in which N. takes M. for better, for worse.’”

Harriet had answered Emma’s letter, breaking to her the true state of affairs, much as might have been supposed, without reproaches, or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of resentment, a something bordering on it in her style, which increased the desirableness of their being separate. It might be only her own consciousness, but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke.

But an invitation from Isabella is procured, Harriet finds the excuse of wishing to see a dentist, and Emma has the comfort of getting Harriet conveyed in state, in Mr. Woodhouse’s carriage, to Brunswick Square, and established there for a fortnight.

[Pg 310]

John Knightley replies to his brother’s announcement of his intended marriage, with brotherly congratulations, in which Emma declares he writes like a sensible man. It is very plain he considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on her side, but that he is not without hope of her growing, in time, worthy of Mr. Knightley’s affection.

Mr. Knightley remonstrates like a lover on this inference. He means no such thing; he only means——

“Oh!” she cries, “if you fancy your brother does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret, and hear his opinion. Depend upon it, he will be much farther from doing you justice. He will think all the happiness, all the advantage, on your side of the question—all the merit on mine. I wish I may not sink into ‘poor Emma’ with him at once. His tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther.”

The communication of the couple’s purpose is made in the gentlest manner to Mr. Woodhouse. The information gives the poor gentleman a considerable shock. He tries earnestly to dissuade Emma from her intention. “She was reminded more than once of her having always said she would never marry, and assured that it would be a great deal better for her to remain single, and told of poor Isabella and poor Miss Taylor. But it would not do. Emma hung about him affectionately and smiled, and said it must be so, and that he must not class her with Isabella and Mrs. Weston, whose marriages, taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change. But she was not going from Hartfield. She was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the better. Did not he love Mr. Knightley very much? Would not he like to have him always on the spot?”

“Yes, that was all very true; Mr. Knightley could not be there too often; he should be glad to see him every day; but they did see him every day as it was. Why could not they go on as they had done?”

[Pg 311]

Mr. Woodhouse cannot soon be reconciled, but at least the matter is broken to him.

Contrast the tender, protecting reverence of the gay and witty Emma Woodhouse to her father’s weakness, with the flippant, bold, offensive disrespect displayed by so many of the silly, ill-bred, unprincipled heroines of modern novels to their despised and insulted fathers.

The proposed marriage has the warmest support from the rest of Emma’s friends—above all, from Isabella and Mrs. Weston. Mrs. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in reflections on the perfection of the match in every respect, “was one of the happiest women in the world. If anything could increase her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon have outgrown its first set of caps.”[65]

Mr. Weston walks into Highbury the morning after he has heard the good news, to ascertain if “Jane” had any suspicion of it, and before night it is all over the place. It is, generally speaking, a well-approved match, though Mr. Elton can do no more than hope the young lady’s pride will now be contented, and suppose she has always meant to “catch Knightley;” and Mrs. Elton is forced to cry, “Rather he than I! Poor Knightley!” There will be an end to their pleasant intercourse. No more exploring parties to Donwell made for her. Shocking plan, living together! She knew a family near Maple Grove who had tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter.

I must beg Mrs. Elton’s pardon for differing from her, in remarking how far Jane Austen—with her hero and heroine—was above selfish insular prejudices, in contemplating the humane, kindly arrangement which did not fear to unite, in one household, kindred, old and young, of different generations.

Harriet’s visit to London has been protracted to a[Pg 312] month’s duration, and Emma is rather anxiously anticipating her friend’s return in company with John Knightley and his wife, when Mr. Knightley walks in one morning, to tell her some news which he will not undertake to define as either good or bad.

She cries, it is good, for she sees him trying not to smile.

“I am afraid,” he said, composing his features, “I am very much afraid, my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it.” He goes on to observe there is one subject on which they differ—does she not recollect it—Harriet Smith?

Emma’s cheeks flush, and she feels afraid for what is coming.

“You are prepared for the worst, I see, and very bad it is. Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin.”

Emma gives a violent start.

It is so, indeed. Mr. Knightley has had it from Robert Martin himself. He left him not half an hour before.

Still Emma sits, the picture of amazement.

Mr. Knightley prepares to try to reconcile her to the fact.

She interrupts him. It is not that such a circumstance can now make her unhappy; but she cannot believe it. He must only mean that Robert Martin intends to propose to Harriet!

“I mean that he has done it, and been accepted.”

“Well!” exclaims Emma; and, oh! the significance of the interjection!—she has to bend her face over her work-basket, to conceal her expression of delight and entertainment, while she begs for particulars.

“It is a very simple story. He went to town on business three days ago, and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send to John. He delivered these papers to John at his chambers, and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley’s. They were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley’s. The party was to be our brother and[Pg 313] sister, Henry, John,—and Miss Smith. My friend Robert could not resist. They called for him in their way; were all extremely amused; and my brother asked him to dine with them next day, which he did; and in the course of that visit, as I understand, he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet, and certainly did not speak in vain. She made him, by her acceptance, as happy even as he is deserving. He came down by yesterday’s coach, and was with me this morning, immediately after breakfast, to report his proceedings, first on my affairs, and then on his own. That is all I can relate of the how, where, and when. Your friend Harriet will make a much longer history when you see her. She will give you all the minute particulars, which only woman’s language can make interesting. In our communications we deal only in the great. However, I must say that Robert Martin’s heart seemed for him and to me very overflowing; and that he did mention, without its being much to the purpose, that on quitting their box at Astley’s, my brother took charge of Mrs. John Knightley and little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry; and that at one time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy.”

Emma dares hardly speak, lest she should betray her unreasonable happiness; but she ventures to say she has learnt to think Harriet is doing extremely well; only the affair is so sudden, for she received reason lately to believe Harriet Smith more determined against Mr. Martin than ever.

“You ought to know your friend best,” replies Mr. Knightley; “but I should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be very, very determined against any young man who told her he loved her.”

Emma cannot help laughing. “Upon my word, I believe you know her quite as well as I do.”

He says he has taken some pains, as Emma must have seen, both for her sake and Robert Martin’s[Pg 314] sake—he had reason to believe him as much in love with Harriet as ever—to get better acquainted with Harriet; and he has come to the satisfactory conclusion that she is an artless, amiable girl, with “very good notions, very seriously good principles, placing her happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life.”

No doubt, simple young Harriet Smiths, who are like wax in the hands of their friends, have not died out in the land; but the great thing for them, as for the wisest of their sex, is that they should possess integrity, a high sense of duty, that “good and honest heart,” which brings forth fruit a hundredfold. Having this greatest grace, they can dispense even with the intellectual gifts which have been denied them.

Emma is very serious and humble in her thankfulness; “yet there was no preventing a laugh sometimes. She must laugh at such a close—such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back—such a heart—such a Harriet!”

“Now there would be a pleasure in her returning; everything would be a pleasure; it would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.”

High among Emma’s pleasures is the consciousness that there will soon be no farther need for concealment in any of her relations. Her rejoicing at the prospect of a speedy escape from “disguise, equivocation, mystery—so hateful to her in practice”—ought to be written in letters of gold for an age of sorry romance, which is no true romance, since its foundations are so often laid in deception and double-dealing.

There is a charming conclusion to the second last chapter of “Emma,” in which many of the actors in the story meet accidentally at Randalls. There Emma first sees Frank Churchill after the explanations which have occurred, and after the announcement of their respective marriages. When a few moments of awkwardness have been surmounted, he thanks her for her message of forgiveness; and after they have renewed their friendly alliance on a more secure foundation, his spirits soon[Pg 315] rise to their old high level. “Was she not looking well?” he said, confident of Emma’s sympathy, as he turned his eyes towards Jane; “better than she used to do?”

He is soon ready to fix laughing eyes on his companion, as he mentions the return of the Campbells, and names the name of Dixon.

Emma blushes, and forbids its being pronounced in her hearing.

“I can never think of it,” she cries, “without extreme shame.”

“The shame,” he answers, “is all mine—or ought to be”—a wise reservation. Then he asks if it is possible she never had any suspicion, and mentions how near he had once been to telling her everything. He demands Emma’s pity for his being compelled to remain at such a distance from Miss Fairfax, as not to have seen her once before since their reconciliation. Then with a gay, “Oh, by-the-bye,” he hopes Mr. Knightley is well, and returns her congratulations with interest. “He is a man,” said Frank Churchill, “whom I cannot presume to praise.”

Emma is delighted, and wants him to go on in the same style.

No, he is off the next moment to his own concerns and his own Jane. Did Emma ever see such a skin, such smoothness, such delicacy, a most distinguishing complexion, just colour enough for beauty?

“‘I have always admired her complexion,’ replied Emma, archly; ‘but do not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so pale?—when we first began to talk of her—have you quite forgotten?’

“‘Oh, no. What an impudent dog I was; how could I dare——’

“But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not help saying, ‘I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, you had very great amusement in tricking us all. I am sure you had. I am sure it was a consolation to you.’

[Pg 316]

“‘Oh, no, no, no! How can you suspect me of such a thing? I was the most miserable wretch.’

“‘Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth. I am sure it was a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking us all in. Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the truth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same situation. I think there is a little likeness between us.’

“He bowed.

“‘If not in our dispositions,’ she presently added, with a look of true sensibility, ‘there is a likeness in our destiny—the destiny which bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own.’

“‘True, true,’ he answered warmly. ‘No, not true on your side. You can have no superior. But most true on mine. She is a complete angel. Look at her! Is not she an angel in every gesture? Observe the turn of her throat. Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father. You will be glad to hear’ (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) ‘that my uncle means to give her all my aunt’s jewels. They are to be new set. I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head. Will it not be beautiful in her dark hair?’[66]

“‘Very beautiful indeed,’ replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly that he gratefully burst out, ‘How delighted I am to see you again! and to see you in such excellent looks! I would not have missed this meeting for the world. I should certainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come.’

“Mrs. Weston is talking of some little alarm she had felt about the child, when she was within half a minute of sending for Mr. Perry.

“Frank Churchill caught the name. ‘Perry!’ said he to Emma, and trying as he spoke to catch Miss[Pg 317] Fairfax’s eye, ‘My friend, Mr. Perry. What are they saying about Mr. Perry? Has he been here this morning? and how does he travel now? Has he set up his carriage?’

“Emma soon recollected and understood him; and while she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.

“‘Such an extraordinary dream of mine!’ he cried. ‘I can never think of it without laughing. She hears us; she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. I see it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. Look at her! Do not you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own letter, which sent me the report, is passing under her eye; that the whole blunder is spread before her; that she can attend to nothing else, though pretending to listen to the others?’

“Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious, low, yet steady voice—‘How you can bear such recollections is astonishing to me! They will sometimes obtrude; but how can you court them?’”

Jane Austen is not in favour of blindness in love. In the room of doting adoration, she makes her men and women feel the nobler, more rational, and infinitely more lasting love which sees all the faults of the person beloved, yet loves on fondly and faithfully, doing love’s best work in helping to remedy the imperfections. George Knightley is capable—not merely of finding fault with Emma, but of sharply reproving her, in his true and tender regard for her. Nay, we suspect there is something which may find even less approval from some critics, in Elizabeth Bennet and Jane Fairfax, at the summit of their happiness, remaining still clear-sighted and impartial enough to perceive the weak points, in characters so different as those of the two heroes, Darcy and Frank Churchill, and to set themselves to remove the flaws, even as the women themselves[Pg 318] desire to be taught to recognise and amend their own foibles.

What worthy, enduring, consecrated love it is which stands such wholesome tests!

Neither is Miss Austen greatly on the side of love at first sight. She is a little distrustful of first impressions, and rather prefers—as the wiser and safer course—to give her girls to old and tried friends, who have developed into faithful lovers.

It is Harriet’s turn to look a little foolish when she and Emma meet; but having once owned that she had been presumptuous, silly, and self-deceived, her pain and confusion seem to die away, and leave her without a care for the past, and with the fullest exultation in the present and future—Emma’s unqualified congratulations removing every fear on the score of Harriet’s friend. Harriet is most happy to give every detail of the evening at Astley’s, and the dinner next day.

The fact is, she had always liked Robert Martin, and his continuing to love her has proved, under the circumstances, irresistible.

Emma becomes acquainted with Robert Martin, who is introduced at Hartfield. She feels perfectly satisfied with regard to the future respectability and happiness of her friend. At the same time Harriet’s engagements with the Martins, which draw her more and more from Hartfield, are not to be regretted. Jane Austen, with her uncompromising good sense, adds—“The intimacy between her and Emma must sink; their friendship must change into a calmer sort of good-will; and fortunately what ought to be, and must be, seemed already beginning, and in the most gradual, natural manner.”

But Emma does not fail to attend Harriet to church, in the end of that September, and see her hand bestowed on Robert Martin, with the blessing pronounced by Mr. Elton; while Emma has not a thought to spare for the identity of the officiating clergyman, beyond being engrossed by the reflection that it will probably be the[Pg 319] same man who will do a like office for her and Mr. Knightley in the coming month of October.

Jane Fairfax has already quitted Highbury. She is restored to the comforts and refinements of her beloved home with the Campbells. The two Mr. Churchills—uncle and nephew—are also in town, and they are only waiting for the expiration of their first three months’ mourning, to celebrate the event which will remove Jane to preside over the dignified establishment at Enscombe.

After all, Emma and Mr. Knightley owe to a comical accident the power to go on with their share of the triple marriages at the time appointed, without distressing Mr. Woodhouse too much, as Emma recoiled from doing—though she perfectly believed the assurances of both the Mr. Knightleys, that when the catastrophe was over, the distress would soon be over too.

During the period of suspense, by an ill wind which blows somebody good, Mrs. Weston’s poultry-house is robbed of all her turkeys—evidently by the ingenuity of man. “Other poultry yards in the neighbourhood also suffered. Pilfering was house-breaking to Mr. Woodhouse’s fears. He was very uneasy; and but for the sense of his son-in-law’s protection, would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life. The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of the Mr. Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. While either of them protected him and his, Hartfield was safe. But Mr. John Knightley must be in London again, by the end of the first week in November.”

The result is, that with a much more cheerful and voluntary consent than she had ever ventured to hope for from her father, his daughter is able to fix the marriage day.

“The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties have no taste for finery and parade; and Mrs. Elton, from the particulars detailed by her husband, thought it all extremely shabby and very inferior to her own. ‘Very little white satin; very few lace veils; a most pitiful business! Selina would stare[Pg 320] when she heard of it.’ But in spite of these deficiencies, the wishes, the hopes, the confidence, the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the ceremony were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union.”

In some respects “Emma” stands first among Jane Austen’s novels. In construction it is as nearly as possible perfect. The unparalleled art which, from characters and incidents even simpler and more ordinary than usual, builds up a tale which never for a moment loses its charm and interest, which is made to “grow,” as in real life—the one motive and the one action springing out of the other—the characters developing and ripening in exact proportion, is carried to such a height that critics have been justified in saying—and how rarely is such an assertion warranted in fiction?—that there is not a single chapter which could have been withdrawn without serious injury to the skilfully interwoven threads of the story. For that matter, critics might have gone a good deal further, and asserted that not a scene or a conversation, hardly a paragraph, could have been abstracted or shortened, without marring in a measure the succession of clearly discriminating, exquisitely delicate touches by which the author has done her work.

It is this artistic completeness which makes it so difficult—in a sense so ungracious a task, to condense Jane Austen’s pages, or tamper with them, however carefully and scrupulously. When one thinks by contrast of the disgracefully slovenly—not to say weak and foolish—performances which are often allowed to pass muster as story-telling, it is with mortification and misery for many of the professors of the “craft.”

Besides the incomparable finish which belongs to the author’s later novels, we have a nearly unique power of reading nice varieties of character in “Emma:” whether we turn to the plaintive, cautious Mr. Woodhouse; to John Knightley in his trenchant speeches; to Miss Bates in her pitter-patter of innocent gossip, to Emma in her rash blindness; to Harriet in her sweet[Pg 321] silliness; to Frank Churchill, in his boyish enjoyment of stolen waters and bread eaten in secret, and the general mystification of his friends and acquaintances, no less than in his wilful, yet lovable and loyal passion for Jane Fairfax; to Mrs. Elton in her vain airs and clamorous self-assertion; to Mr. Knightley in his unpretending, kindly manliness.

decorative image

FOOTNOTES:
[45]Written in 1815-16.

[46]What a capital picture, of an amiable rich man’s bondage.

[47]Are old abbeys so common in Hampshire that Jane Austen should have made two of her country-houses abbeys?

[48]The habit, now gone out of fashion, of having grown-up parlour-boarders in schools, rendered them more like homes for young people of all ages.

[49]These old genial suppers have vanished, being crowded out of existence by late dinners, which are very different meals.

[50]We can, however, imagine Harriet’s showing that book, with lingering pride and pleasure, to her grandchildren.

[51]The more convivial habits of the period peep out here and there in Jane Austen’s novels.

[52]Disingenuous, mocking Emma!

[53]In reading Jane Austen’s novels one is carried back to the time when good playing on the piano, or “the instrument” as it is frequently called, was held, in the higher classes, as it is now in much lower grades, a crowning mark of a liberal education in a girl. Yet Jane Austen herself fell short of this attainment, and she almost invariably makes her heroines—as in the experiences of Elizabeth Bennet, Emma Woodhouse, Catherine Morland, and Fanny Price—either to have failed in the duty of practising, so as not to have acquired more than a moderate proficiency in music, or else to have been deficient in musical taste or deprived of musical education.

[54]I have already said that Jane Austen wastes no time in descriptions of places; yet she often contrives to suggest so much in a few lines, that her pleasant, homely English scenes, no less than her life-like characters, rise vividly before the mind. That briefest description of Abbey Mill Farm—comfortable and tidy, with the short, straight walk between the apple-trees up to the front door—does its business thoroughly. I have seen more than one such cosy, trim, old-fashioned farmhouse, which has brought the exclamation to my lips, “That was where Harriet Smith visited the Martins.”

[55]I think it was Archbishop Whately who said, apropos of Jane Austen’s novels, that so far from its being easy to represent the simplicity and folly which, like poverty, we have always with us, so as to divert a reader, it demands nothing short of genius for the task.

[56]Already, in the interval between the writing of “Pride and Prejudice” and of “Emma,” the constant use of men’s surnames in conversation was going out in good society.

[57]I have heard that a great modern statesman, who takes some relaxation in reading novels, and who is an ardent admirer of Jane Austen, is specially in love with Mrs. Elton. Her portrait is his favourite in this wonderful picture-gallery.

[58]In the course of the conversation, Jane Austen puts into Jane Fairfax’s mouth a strong expression of admiration for the post-office arrangements, with their regularity and despatch. Yet these were the days of heavily-taxed letters and delayed conveyance by coach. What would Jane Austen have thought of the penny post, with its multiplied responsibilities and requirements, to which railway celerity is given? and still the system bears the strain, and admirably fulfils the intention of its founder.

[59]Morning walks, “taken fasting,” are now, we may be thankful, an utterly exploded prescription for delicate men and women.

[60]In how many country houses in England is spruce beer to be found to-day?

[61]The position of Frank Churchill—dependent on his uncle and aunt, bound to humour their whims and wait on their pleasure—seems never to have struck Jane Austen as unmanly and undesirable.

[62]A striking illustration of what a good woman must suffer from such a false step as that which Jane Fairfax had taken.

[63]Emma has as much trouble in convincing her friends that she is not attached to Frank Churchill, as Elizabeth Bennet found in persuading her relations that she returned the affection of Darcy.

[64]Mr. Knightley’s quiet superiority to public opinion in making such a suggestion, is another fine point in a fine character.

[65]Babies’ tiny caps have disappeared, like some other articles of costume in Emma’s day. What would Mrs. Weston have thought of the bald little polls which are now fearlessly exposed by mothers and nurses?

[66]

“They’ve robed that maid so poor and pale
In silks and samites rare;
And pearls for drops of frozen hail
Are glistening in her hair.”
[Pg 322]

decorative image

“SENSE AND SENSIBILITY,” AND “MANSFIELD PARK.”

F the two novels for which I have not found space here, the one belongs to the first, and the other to the second series of Jane Austen’s tales.

“Sense and Sensibility” in its original form was, with the exception perhaps of “Lady Susan,” the first written of the author’s stories which have come down to us. It has always seemed to me inferior to the novels which follow it, though its writer not only re-wrote it in her youth, but prepared it again for the press in her mature years, and brought it out before “Pride and Prejudice.” The astonishing precedence thus given might, however, have been accidental, or it might have been the result of the publisher’s choice. It might also have been an instance of Jane Austen’s confidence in her own powers and steadfastness of purpose. Certainly she appears to have valued “Sense and Sensibility” as highly as her other novels: an example of the proverbial blindness of authors to the proportion of merit in their own writings.

To say that “Sense and Sensibility” is inferior to its companions is by no means to suggest that it is without excellence. It has many of the attractions of Miss Austen’s work. It is bright, clever, interesting and exceedingly life-like. Here and there, as in the characters[Pg 323] of Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwood, Mr. and Mrs. Palmer, and Mrs. Jennings there is a good deal of the author’s critical acumen and dry humour, yet they hardly arrive at their subsequent perfection. Thus Mr. and Mrs. Palmer, who are a little like Mr. and Mrs. Bennet in their youth, lag behind that entertaining couple.

In accordance with the name,[67] the story turns upon the relative advantages and disadvantages of sense and sensibility, the verdict being given, as might have been expected from the author, in favour of sense.

Two sisters, Ellinor and Marianne Dashwood, equally good, but the one full of quiet self-control, the other of impetuous feeling, which she never seeks to restrain, rather priding herself on its indulgence, as a proof of the strength and depth of her opinions and affections, have an oddly similar fate, being both in turn disappointed in love, and in a manner jilted by their respective lovers—Edward Ferrars, the reserved, sober-minded, somewhat sad, young clergyman; and John Willoughby, a frank, fervent, reckless young fellow, the masculine type which matches with the style of girls like Marianne Dashwood.

The causes and ends of the two sisters’ histories are quite different from each other. And the happy termination of Ellinor’s trials is not made a consequence of her superior wisdom and moderation—a nice distinction, with its appreciation of the facts of life, and of the rewards and punishments which must be inward, not outward, certainly remarkable in a young author.

Edward Ferrars’ unwitting injury to Ellinor proceeds from his too great susceptibility to her attractions, and his involuntary betrayal of his attachment when he is thrown much in her company, while all the time he is an unresisting victim to a foolish youthful engagement. The lady is a pert, underbred Lucy Steele, with an irrepressible sister Anne; both of them determined not to lose sight of a great match for Lucy.

[Pg 324]

Willoughby, after a romantic introduction to Marianne, first compromises himself by paying the most marked attention to the girl; and then, to meet the views of the relative on whom he is dependent, consents to give her up with the most cruel abruptness and harshness, and to pay his addresses to an heiress who is, in every respect save her fortune, repugnant to him.

Ellinor, who is made painfully aware of her lover’s entanglement by the cunning of Lucy Steele in selecting the very girl whom Edward Ferrars prefers for her confidante, behaves not merely with perfect honour, but bears the mortification and grief with such gentle dignity and patience, and such magnanimous consideration for the unhappiness of Edward and the rights of Lucy, as to rob her unhappiness of half its sting, and to escape all humiliating exposure to the speculation and pity of her friends and acquaintances.

Marianne—who, far from checking, has gloried in Willoughby’s extravagant devotion, and has never dreamt of concealing her answering devotion, which she regards as his due—abandons herself in the same proportion to incredulity, anguish, and despair on his desertion, until her life nearly pays the forfeit, and she has rendered herself an object either of ridicule or compassion to her whole circle.

At last Edward Ferrars is released, without dishonour on his part, from his rash engagement to Lucy Steele, by that calculating young lady’s having found a still better match in Edward’s less worthy brother, who is, however, the favourite son of their rich, tyrannical mother. The jilted man is thus free to consult his heart, and lays his tithes and parsonage at the feet of Ellinor Dashwood, who, on her part, is not too intolerant to accept the offer.

Marianne is cured of her folly by the shock of the illness which brings her to the brink of the grave, and by such atonement as Willoughby can offer, in the violence of his self-accusation and misery, when he believes she is dying, really killed by his barbarity.[Pg 325] He takes a long night’s journey to inquire for her, and makes a clean breast to Ellinor of the reality of his love for her sister, and his remorse for the ill usage which, in his cowardliness and selfishness, he has inflicted on her.

Marianne Dashwood is so effectually cured—there is much hope for the broken heart of eighteen—that she listens before long, with gratitude and sympathy, to the constant, tender suit of that Colonel Brandon whom she had formerly laughed at and scorned as a lover, because he had reached the advanced age of thirty-five, had to take precautions against rheumatism, and confessed to having, when a young man, suffered from an unfortunate attachment; while Marianne Dashwood has not believed hitherto in any love save first love.

The evil of the gushing sensibility or sentimentality which, during the last century, girls were understood to cherish till it disqualified them for sober duty and rational behaviour, against which their mentors—whether young, blooming, and arch, like Jane Austen when she wrote “Sense and Sensibility,” or old, wrinkled, and grave, like Dr. Gregory when he delivered his advice to his daughters—were constantly warning young women, has given place in many quarters in this nineteenth century to a rollicking pretence of no feeling, a fast assumption of hardness, heartlessness and utter carelessness. Of the two evils the last would be the worse, if we could believe in its being anything more than an unlovely mask, in which bad manners and bad taste are occasionally combined with morbid shyness and sensitiveness, which, rather than betray themselves, assume the guise of levity, worldly-mindedness, or stolid indifference.

But the old frantic manifestations of love, hatred, and anguish are still to be found in a coarse, crude enough fashion; and, strange to say, are welcomed when found by the very readers who reprobate the existence in their own breasts of a pin’s prick of the piled-up agonies which they enjoy in print in not a few modern novels.

“Mansfield Park,” one of Jane Austen’s later tales,[Pg 326] is also one of her best. The story is intended to show the wrong and suffering, the positive moral taint produced by an entirely worldly education—whether the worldliness has been confined to practice in opposition to principles, or whether the very principles have never been inculcated, or have been presented in such a distorted form as to lose all power for good.

The handsome, healthy, wealthy, well-born and well-bred sons and daughters of Sir Thomas Bertram, of Mansfield Park, have been fortunate in inheriting all the good things of this life; and not the least fortunate in possessing an honourable and upright father—though his social prejudices and his partiality to his own flesh and blood somewhat warp his judgment and dull his perceptions—and a mother who, though an indolent, self-indulgent woman, is utterly incapable of active unkindness or wrong-doing.

The counteracting, overbalancing loss against so much gain is, that the young Bertrams, with one exception, have never learnt the first rudiments of self-denial and self-restraint. Tom, Maria, and Julia Bertram, under a thin varnish of polish and liveliness, are thoroughly selfish, self-willed young people, not really happy amidst all their advantages and the popularity secured by them, and altogether unprepared for the temptations and vicissitudes of life. Only Edmund Bertram—who, as the younger son, brought up to fill the family living, may by comparison have borne the yoke in his youth—is manly, generous, and kind.

The Bertrams’ great friends, Henry and Mary Crawford, who had been left as orphans to the care of an uncle and aunt—of whom the first was one of the worst specimens of the coarse and vicious naval officer[68] of the day, and the second had lived a cat-and-dog life with[Pg 327] her husband—have missed what ought to have been the firm foundation of the Bertrams’ characters.

No sacred sense of duty, no fine perception of rectitude extending to word and thought, no unsullied purity of tone, had been, even in theory, instilled into the Crawfords by the couple who, with all their faults, had still loved and petted the boy and girl entrusted to them; and so had been in one sense armed with deadliest weapons to destroy the children’s moral nature.

Henry and Mary Crawford have, according to a graphic old saying, hung as they grew, without training, unless in evil. They have been endowed with many fine natural gifts and qualities, in addition to the accessories of rank and wealth. With regard to the last, Henry has a good estate in Norfolk, and Mary possesses a fortune of twenty thousand pounds. In reference to the first, Mary is a lovely brunette, as well as a witty, merry, good-natured woman, who can play on the harp and sing in the long summer evenings to distraction—so far as young men are concerned. Henry, though not handsome, has a good figure and “a fine countenance,” by which old-fashioned phrase I understand a highly agreeable and intelligent expression of face. He is even wittier and more talented than his sister, frank, equal to any difficult occasion of social life, and capable of winning golden opinions in all; a special treasure in a dull country house; “a charming fellow”—in short, a very fascinating young man.

The two Crawfords present the fairest exterior on first acquaintance. They are cast in an altogether finer mould than Tom Bertram and his sisters, and are fitted for better things by a subtle touch of their author’s art. It takes time and trial to discover that under the winning surface there is neither soundness nor steadfastness: the very core is corrupt.

In broad contrast to the Crawfords and the Bertrams—all save Edmund—are Fanny and William Price, the daughter and son of the poor, worthless Lieutenant of Marines. They have been called upon from their[Pg 328] earliest childhood to be helpful, contented with little, and self-forgetful. If Jane Austen dwelt somewhat strongly in “Emma” on the blessings of prosperity, in “Mansfield Park” she had already taught, and never with greater effect, how sweet were the uses of adversity.

Probably, of all the author’s heroines, Fanny Price, if not the most charming, is the greatest triumph of genius, for one can hardly conceive two natures moulded by circumstances more unlike than the life of Jane Austen in her youth, and that of the timid, shrinking, sickly Fanny Price. She comes as a humble protégée to Mansfield Park, and has to endure all the well-meant but somewhat oppressive patronage of Sir Thomas, the perpetual fault-finding of her aunt Norris, and the alternate condescension and snubbing of her cousins—always excepting her champion, Edmund. But a little later on, even Edmund turns without knowing it against his little cousin, whom he has defended, encouraged, and been fond of ever since she came to Mansfield Park. For it is the worst heart-ache of all to Fanny to see the cousin Edmund whom she has looked up to, and loved all these years, about to throw himself away on Mary Crawford, whom Fanny knows, by sure instinct, to be unworthy of him. Edmund in his blindness insists on making his friend-pupil the confidante of his hopes and fears; nay, as if to add insult to injury, in his affectionate zeal for his young cousin’s welfare, he presses on her to accept the suit of another man.

So completely did Jane Austen realise all the softness and sweetness, and yet the staunchness—all the fragrant, white-violet-like charm of Fanny Price—so well did the author describe the pangs of wounded love in the tenderest of hearts—the meek mortification of a gentle nature which bore no grudge against its enemies—the pensive joys, the tremulous apprehensions of the situation—that Archbishop Whately went near to asserting the conviction that only a woman who had been herself crossed in love could thus fully interpret her heroine.

[Pg 329]

Mrs. Norris—Fanny’s terrible Aunt Norris, with her unslumbering activity, her restless meddling, her good deeds done by proxy in the parsimony which was stronger even than the love of rule, her doting indulgence to the young Bertrams, her carping snappishness to Fanny Price and her brother William—is an unsurpassed representation of a domineering, time-serving, radically harsh and mean nature, under all its pretensions and self-deceptions, as well as an inimitable piece of genteel comedy.

William Price—Fanny’s frank, light-hearted young sailor brother—with his pride in his profession, and his fondness for his sister, is also very good.

I do not wish to tell in a few words how Fanny escaped the imminent peril of being won by Henry Crawford. Indeed the peril, in the author’s fidelity to nature, is so imminent, in spite of Fanny’s pre-engaged affections—granting that they were hopeless—and the reader is so enchanted with the flattered young prince’s sudden keen appreciation of the neglected Cinderella, that he or she is tempted against reason, almost against conscience, to long that Henry Crawford’s love may prevail over his levity, vanity, and lack of settled principles, and earn its reward, rendering him at once a better and a happier man.

But Jane Austen knew better, and the grievous sin and shame which separate for ever Henry Crawford and Fanny Price, is made to open Edmund Bertram’s eyes to the moral gulf between his nature and that of Mary Crawford, which, no less than his sister’s degradation, simply renders it impossible for him to marry Mary.

The obstacles between the couple, who have been fitted for each other from the first, thus doubly swept away, Jane Austen does not waste many words in bringing them together, and leaving them happy for ever afterwards.

The scenes during the private theatricals—when Sir Thomas is lending dignified encouragement to Mr.[Pg 330] Crawford’s attentions to his niece, by giving a ball at Mansfield Park—when Fanny is sent to pay her visit to her home at Portsmouth, not so much to punish her for her obstinate refusal of her gallant, undaunted lover, as to teach her when she is well off, and how she ought to prize the good fortune within her reach—are among the best Jane Austen has painted.

Jane Austen had something of a parental affection for her books. She wrote to a friend, whose little daughter had been lately born, “I trust you will be as glad to see my ‘Emma’ as I shall be to see your Jemima.” She did not dismiss from her mind the creatures of her fancy with the narrative in which they had figured. She seemed to like to follow them in imagination in the careers into which she had launched them. They were real men and women[69] to her. She would, when asked, supply further particulars of the history of some of these brain-children. Her friends learned in this way that Anne Steele found a husband in the doctor; that Kitty Bennet was satisfactorily married to a clergyman near Pemberley, while Mary obtained nothing higher than one of her Uncle Philip’s clerks, and was content to be considered a star in Meryton; that the considerable sum given by Mrs. Norris to William Price was one pound; that the letters placed by Frank Churchill before Jane Fairfax, which she swept away unread, contained the one word “pardon!” and that Mr. Woodhouse survived his daughter’s marriage, and kept her and Mr. Knightley from Donwell about two years.

FOOTNOTES:
[67]Jane Austen must have had a partiality for alliteration.

[68]In “Mansfield Park” it would seem as if Jane Austen impartially afforded a glimpse in Admiral Crawford and Lieutenant Price—though, to be sure, the last was only a lieutenant of marines—of the dark side of the members of the naval profession, whose bright side she illustrated, con amore, in William Price and in the naval officers in “Persuasion.”

[69]Children and animals are as much in the background in Jane Austen’s novels as they were in the society of her day.

[Pg 331]

decorative image

“PERSUASION.”[70]
I.

T eighteen Anne Elliot, a pretty, gentle, motherless girl, one of the three daughters of a poor and proud baronet, had met a gallant young naval officer, a Lieutenant Wentworth, who had paid ample homage to her attractions. The couple had fallen very genuinely and deeply in love. Their marriage was impossible till the gentleman should rise in his profession, or come home with prize-money. But Sir Walter Elliot, more from indifference than indulgence to Anne, would have permitted the engagement—entered into for a brief space of mingled happiness and misery—to continue. It was Lady Russell—Anne’s mother’s friend—who interfered, and by her urgent representations of the trials of a long engagement, and the sacrifice of the man’s prospects, still more than those of the woman, in a poor marriage, induced Anne to consent to the engagement being broken off.

The couple parted in mutual sorrow, strongly dashed by resentment on the gentleman’s side. They did not meet, they hardly heard of each other again, for eight years, during which the young officer followed his profession and won honours and fortune; while the girl he had loved lived on with her uncongenial relatives, and passed, with more than usual rapidity, from blooming,[Pg 332] light-hearted girlhood to pale, serious womanhood.[71] In the interval certainly she might have married, with the approval of Lady Russell, who began to take alarm, and grow less exacting for her favourite. But Anne refused Charles Musgrove, younger, of Uppercross, who contented himself afterwards with her sister Mary. This event happened two years after the rupture with Lieutenant Wentworth, and six or seven years before the opening of the story. Since then, to Lady Russell’s mortification, no desirable wooer had succeeded these earlier suitors.

In the course of the thirteen years during which Elizabeth Elliott, a handsome, cold-hearted woman, had presided over Kellynch and her father’s house in London, opened county balls, and taken the lead at county dinner parties, Sir Walter, a foolish old coxcomb, had managed to get into embarrassed circumstances. The father and daughter had a capacity for spending, but none for retrenchment; so that when economy became absolutely necessary, the only feasible plan which presented itself was for Sir Walter to let Kellynch, and retire to Bath, where he could practise a certain amount of display with less outlay. Lady Russell, the great friend of the family, reluctantly advised this course.

The termination of the war is turning many naval officers ashore, and Kellynch is soon let to an Admiral Croft. On the first mention of him as a possible tenant Sir Walter asks superciliously, “And who is Admiral Croft?” and Anne joins in the conversation all at once, volunteering the minute information, “He is Rear-admiral of the White. He was on the Trafalgar station, and has been in the East Indies since. He has been stationed there, I believe, several years.”

[Pg 333]

When it is nearly settled that Admiral Croft is to come to Kellynch, Anne Elliott reflects sadly as she paces her favourite walk, “A few months more, and he, perhaps, may be walking here.” “He” is not Admiral Croft, but his brother-in-law, Captain Wentworth.

When it is fixed that the Crofts are to come to Kellynch, and the Elliots are to go to Bath, it is also fixed that Anne is to pay visits to Lady Russell and to young Mrs. Musgrove, before she joins the rest of her family.

At Uppercross village there are the Great House, occupied by the squire and his wife, with their numerous younger children, prominent among whom are the two pleasant girls, Henrietta and Louisa Musgrove, and the Cottage where Charles Musgrove and his wife, Anne Elliott’s sister, reside. Mrs. Charles, though selfish, and not over-wise, is less destitute of family affection than Elizabeth Elliot. Charles Musgrove is well-intentioned and friendly, with more brains than his wife, though the great object of his life is sport.

The Great House gaieties serve to enliven the family life at the Cottage, for the Musgroves are extremely popular, have a constant succession of neighbourly visitors, give many dinner-parties, and even an occasional unpremeditated little ball, because the girls are “wild for dancing.”

Kellynch and Uppercross are near enough for visiting, and the Musgroves have to call for the Crofts. Anne is glad enough to be spared the visit, but she has no objection to be at home during the return visit.

Admiral Croft and his wife, who has been almost as much at sea as her husband—since these were the days when entire domestic establishments were permitted, to some extent, on board the ships in his Majesty’s navy—show themselves frank, unaffected, and cordial, as become their antecedents. Anne would have heartily approved of Mrs. Croft, even though she had not been prepossessed in her favour, and specially interested in her, because of the opportunity of watching[Pg 334] for a likeness. The regard is extended to the bluff, good-humoured admiral. Just one or two awkward references are made. Mrs. Croft reminds Anne of her acquaintance with the elder lady’s brother, but it turns out to be Edward Wentworth, the clergyman, and not Frederick, the sailor, to whom their sister refers. It may be, also, the same Edward of whom the admiral is thinking, when he remarks, “We are expecting a brother of Mrs. Croft’s here soon,” and is prevented from saying anything more.

But the next communication with one of the Misses Musgrove proves it was not Edward who was the coming brother. When the Crofts had called that morning, they had happened to say her brother, Captain Wentworth, just returned to England, or paid off, or something, was coming to see them almost directly; “and, most unluckily, it came into mamma’s head, when they were gone, that Wentworth, or something like it, was the name of poor Richard’s captain at one time; I do not know when, or where, but a great while before he died, poor fellow! And upon looking over his letters and things she found it was so, and is perfectly sure that this must be the very man; and her head is quite full of it, and of poor Richard.”[72]

In a few days Captain Wentworth is at Kellynch. Mr. Musgrove has fulfilled his intention of calling for him, and it is by the merest chance that Anne and Mary, in one of their daily visits to the Great House, have not encountered Captain Wentworth paying his return visit.

The two sisters were stopped by a bad fall which one of the children had, in which his collar-bone was dislocated, and such alarming consequences apprehended for a time, that Anne was entirely engrossed by the claims upon her.

When the little boy is rather better, his young aunts who have come to inquire for him are at liberty to speak of some other person, and to try to express how perfectly[Pg 335] delighted they are with Captain Wentworth—how much handsomer, how infinitely more agreeable they think him than any individual among their male acquaintances who has been at all a favourite before; how glad they are that he has promised, in reply to their papa and mamma’s pressing invitation, to dine with them to-morrow.

To begin with, neither Charles Musgrove nor his wife can think of leaving the child to join the dinner party. But after the boy has passed a good night, and the surgeon’s report is favourable, they—first the father and then the mother—allow themselves to leave him, for a few hours, in the care of his aunt.

Charles Musgrove and his wife come home delighted with their new acquaintance. He is to shoot with Charles Musgrove next morning. There had been some mention of Captain Wentworth’s coming to breakfast at the cottage, but he had been afraid of being in Mrs. Charles Musgrove’s way on account of the child, and it had been agreed that Charles should meet him at the Great House instead.

Anne understands it. He wishes to avoid seeing her. He has inquired for her slightly, as might suit a former slight acquaintance, seeming to acknowledge such as she had acknowledged, probably with the same view of escaping an introduction when they do meet.

The morning hours of the Cottage were later than those at the other house. Mary and Anne are only beginning breakfast when Charles comes in for his dogs, and announces that his sisters are following with Captain Wentworth, who proposes to wait on Mrs. Charles Musgrove, for a few minutes, if convenient; and though Charles has answered for the state of the child, he would not be satisfied without Charles’s running on to give notice.

Mary is full of gratification at the little attention, “while a thousand feelings rushed on Anne, of which this was the most consoling that it would soon be over. And it was soon over. In two minutes after Charles’s preparation the others appeared; they were in the drawing-room.[Pg 336] Her eye half met Captain Wentworth’s; a bow, a curtsey passed. She heard his voice; he talked to Mary, said all that was right, said something to the Misses Musgrove, enough to mark an easy footing; the room seemed full, full of persons and voices; but a few minutes ended it. Charles showed himself at the window. All was ready; their visitor had bowed and was gone, the Misses Musgrove were gone too, suddenly resolving to walk to the end of the village with the sportsmen; the room was cleared, and Anne might finish her breakfast as she could.”

“It is over! it is over!” she repeated to herself again and again in nervous gratitude. “The worst is over!”

After the Misses Musgrove have finished their visit at the Cottage, Anne receives the spontaneous information from Mary, “Captain Wentworth is not very gallant by you, Anne, though he was so attentive to me. Henrietta asked him what he thought of you when they went away, and he said you were so altered he should not have known you again.”

Mary had no feelings to make her respect her sister’s in a common way, but she was perfectly unsuspicious of having inflicted any peculiar wound. She had been a girl at school during Anne’s brief engagement, and had never been made acquainted with it.

“Altered beyond his knowledge! Anne fully submitted in silent, deep mortification. Doubtless it was so, and she could take no revenge, for he was not altered, or not for the worse, she had already acknowledged it to herself, and she could not think differently, let him think of her as he would. No; the years which had destroyed her youth and bloom had only given him a more glowing, manly, open look, in no respect lessening his personal advantages. She had seen the same Frederick Wentworth.

“Frederick Wentworth had used such words, or something like them, but without an idea that they would be carried round to her. He had thought her wretchedly[Pg 337] altered;[73] in the first moment of appeal had spoken as he felt. He had not forgiven Anne Elliot. She had used him ill, deserted and disappointed him; and worse, she had shown a feebleness of character in doing so, which his own decided, confident temper could not endure. She had given him up to oblige others. It had been the effects of over-persuasion. It had been weakness and timidity.

“He had been most warmly attached to her, and had never seen a woman since, whom he thought her equal; but, except from some natural sensation of curiosity, he had no desire of meeting her again. Her power with him was gone for ever.

“It was now his object to marry. He was rich, and being turned on shore, fully intended to settle as soon as he could be properly tempted; actually looking round, ready to fall in love with all the speed which a clear head and quick taste could allow. He had a heart for either of the Misses Musgrove if they could catch it; a heart, in short, for any pleasing young woman who came in his way, excepting Anne Elliot. This was his only secret exception.”

II.
From this time Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot meet repeatedly in the same circle, and whatever may have become of former feelings, former times are[Pg 338] inevitably alluded to in the conversation:—“That was in the year ’six,” “That happened before I went to sea in the year ’six,” he has occasion to say, the very first evening they spend together, and though his voice does not falter, while she has no reason to suppose his eyes wander towards her, she knows what must be in the minds of both.

“They had no conversation together, no intercourse but what the commonest civility required. Once so much to each other! now nothing! There had been a time when of all the large party now filling the drawing-room at Uppercross they would have found it most difficult to cease to speak to one another, with the exception, perhaps, of Admiral and Mrs. Croft, who seemed particularly attached and happy (Anne would allow no other exception, even among the married couples), there could have been no two hearts so open, no tastes so similar, no feelings so in unison, no countenances so beloved. Now they were as strangers—nay, worse than strangers, for they could never become acquainted. It was a perpetual estrangement.”

He is in the foreground, the greatest and best talker present. Anne is in the background, silent, like

“One mute shadow, watching all.”

The pretty, sweet young daughter of Sir Walter Elliot, whom Lieutenant Wentworth must have found a person of some consequence, however unassuming in her disposition, in the old society in which they mingled, appears now an individual of very little moment, though she is civilly treated, of course, even well liked, when he meets her again, in the character of an unmarried sister of Mrs. Charles Musgrove, at Uppercross.

Anne hears Captain Wentworth enlightening the ignorance of the Misses Musgrove as to the manner of living on board ship. “Their surprise at his accounts, at learning the degree of accommodation and arrangement which was practicable, drew from him some pleasant ridicule, which reminded Anne of the early days[Pg 339] when she, too, had been ignorant, and she, too, had been accused of supposing sailors to be living without anything to eat, or any cook to dress it if there were, or any servant to wait, or any knife and fork to use.”

“It was a merry, joyous family party, and no one seemed in higher spirits than Captain Wentworth. She felt that he had everything to elevate him which general attention and deference, and especially the attention of all the young women, could do. The Misses Hayter (belonging to a family of cousins of the Musgroves) were apparently admitted to the honour of being in love with him; and as for Henrietta and Louisa, they both seemed so entirely occupied by him, that nothing but the continued appearance of the most perfect good-will between themselves could have made it credible that they were not decided rivals. If he were a little spoilt by such universal, such eager admiration, who could wonder?”

These are some of the thoughts which occupy Anne while her fingers are mechanically at work. Once she feels he is looking at her, perhaps trying to find some traces of the face which had formerly charmed him. “Once she knew that he must have spoken of her; she was hardly aware of it till she heard the answer, but then she was sure of his having asked his partner whether Miss Elliot never danced. The answer was ‘Oh, no! never. She has quite given up dancing. She had rather play. She is never tired of playing.’ Once, too, he spoke to her. She had left the instrument on the dancing being over, and he had sat down to try to make out an air which he wished to give the Misses Musgrove an idea of. Unintentionally she returned to that part of the room. He saw her, and instantly rising said, with studied politeness, ‘I beg your pardon, madam, this is your seat;’ and though she immediately drew back with a decided negative, he was not to be induced to sit down again.”

“Anne did not wish for more of such looks and speeches. His cold politeness, his ceremonious grace, were worse than anything.”

[Pg 340]

Captain Wentworth has come to Kellynch as to a home, to stay as long as he likes. It is soon Uppercross with him every day. There is one other person besides Anne whose peace is likely to be disturbed by this arrangement. Charles Hayter, the eldest of the humble cousins of the Musgroves, had received a college education and taken orders. As the heir of his father’s small property, he is also more on an equality socially with the Musgroves than his brothers and sisters could hope to be. He is an agreeable, amiable young man, and there has been some appearance of an attachment between him and Henrietta Musgrove. “Her parents have not objected. It will not be a great match for Henrietta; but if Henrietta likes him—and Henrietta did like him till Captain Wentworth came, when cousin Charles has been very much forgotten.”

It is at this stage of the proceedings that Charles Hayter returns from a fortnight’s absence to find Captain Wentworth engrossing the attention of the Misses Musgrove, with their interest in their cousin’s prospect of securing a particular curacy eclipsed by more exciting speculations. Even Henrietta has nothing better to spare than a hurried “Well, I am very glad indeed, but I always thought you would have it. In short, you knew Dr. Shirley must have a curate, and you had his promise. Is he coming, Louisa?”—to her sister, who is at a window, looking out for Captain Wentworth.

One morning Captain Wentworth walks into the drawing-room at the Cottage, when there are only Anne and the little invalid Charles, who is lying on the sofa.

“The surprise of finding himself almost alone with Anne Elliot deprived his manners of their usual composure. He started, and could only say, ‘I thought the Misses Musgrove had been here; Mrs. Musgrove told me I should find them here,’ before he walked to the window to recollect himself, and feel how he ought to behave.”

“They are up stairs with my sister; they will be down in a few moments, I dare say,” had been Anne’s reply, in all the confusion that was natural, and if the[Pg 341] child had not called her to come and do something for him she would have been out of the room the next moment, and released Captain Wentworth as well as herself.

“He continued at the window; and after calmly and politely saying, ‘I hope the little boy is better,’ was silent.”

“She was obliged to kneel down by the sofa, and remain there to satisfy her patient; and thus they continued a few minutes, when, to her very great satisfaction, she heard some other person crossing the little vestibule. She hoped on turning her head to see the master of the house, but it proved to be one much less calculated for making matters easy—Charles Hayter—probably not at all better pleased by the sight of Captain Wentworth than Captain Wentworth had been by the sight of Anne.”

“She only attempted to say, ‘How do you do? Will you not sit down? The others will be here presently.’”

“Captain Wentworth, however, came from his window, apparently not ill-disposed for conversation; but Charles Hayter soon put an end to his attempts by seating himself near the table and taking up the newspaper, and Captain Wentworth returned to his window.”

“Another minute brought another addition. The younger boy, a remarkably stout, forward child of two years old, having got the door opened for him by some one without, made his determined appearance among them, and went straight to the sofa to see what was going on, and put in his claim to anything good that might be given away.

“There being nothing to eat, he could only have some play; and as his aunt would not let him tease his sick brother, he began to fasten himself upon her, as she knelt, in such a way that, busy as she was about Charles, she could not shake him off. She spoke to him, ordered, entreated, and insisted in vain. Once she did contrive to push him away, but the boy had the greater pleasure in getting upon her back again directly.

[Pg 342]

“‘Walter,’ said she, ‘get down this moment. You are extremely troublesome. I am very angry with you.’

“‘Walter,’ cried Charles Hayter, ‘why do you not do as you are bid? Do not you hear your aunt speak? Come to me, Walter; come to cousin Charles.’

“But not a bit did Walter stir.

“In another moment, however, she found herself in the state of being released from him; some one was taking him from her, though he had bent down her head so much, that his little sturdy arms were unfastened from around her neck, and he was resolutely borne away before she knew that Captain Wentworth had done it.”

She cannot even thank him, she can only hang over little Charles, while the conviction is forced upon her, from the noise which Captain Wentworth is studiously making with the other child, that her thanks and her conversation are the last of his wants, till the entrance of Mary and the Misses Musgrove enables her to leave the room.

Anne Elliot has soon been often enough in the company of Charles Hayter and Captain Wentworth, Henrietta and Louisa Musgrove, to warrant her in forming her own conclusions. Louisa may be rather the favourite with Captain Wentworth, but, as far as Anne dares to judge from memory and experience, he is not in love either with Louisa or Henrietta. “They were more in love with him; yet there, it was not love. It was a little fever of admiration; but it might, probably must, end in love with some. Charles Hayter seemed aware of being slighted, and yet Henrietta had sometimes the air of being divided between them.”

After a short struggle, Charles Hayter appears to quit the field. Three days have passed without his coming to Uppercross. He has even refused one regular invitation to dinner, and Mr. and Mrs. Musgrove chancing to see their nephew with some big books before him, talk with a grave face of his studying himself to death.

[Pg 343]

The sisters from the Great House call one day, when Charles Musgrove and Captain Wentworth have gone out shooting together, for the sisters at the Cottage as they are sitting quietly at work. It is a fine November day, and the Misses Musgrove have only come in, according to the inconvenient habit of the two families which makes it necessary to do everything in common, just as they are setting out for a long walk, in which, they suppose Mary will not care to join them.

Mary, who generally gives herself out as half an invalid, resents the imputation on her walking powers, and declares she would like to accompany her sisters-in-law; she is very fond of a long walk.

Anne sees the glances of annoyance which pass between the girls, and does her best to keep her sister at home. When she cannot prevail, as the next best thing she accepts the Misses Musgrove’s invitation to go also, that she may be useful in turning back with her sister.

At the moment of starting the gentlemen return. They had taken out a young dog which had spoilt their sport. They are exactly ready for this walk.

After the walking party have gone some distance, Anne is tempted to say, “Is not this one of the ways to Winthrop?” (the Hayters’ place), but nobody hears, or, at least, nobody answers her, till Winthrop, without beauty and without dignity, is stretched before them, an indifferent house, standing low, and hemmed in by the barns and buildings of a farmyard.

Mary exclaims, “Bless me! here is Winthrop, I declare; I had no idea!” then announces herself excessively tired, and proposes turning back. Henrietta, conscious and ashamed, seeing no cousin Charles walking along any path, or leaning against any gate, is ready to do as Mary wishes; but “No!” says Charles Musgrove, and “No, no!” cries Louisa, still more energetically, and taking her sister aside, seems to remonstrate with her warmly. Charles declares his intention of calling on his aunt when he is so near, and tries to induce his wife to go too. But the lady is unmanageable. The difficulty[Pg 344] is settled between the brother and sisters: Charles and Henrietta are to run down for a few moments to see their aunt and cousins, while the rest of the party wait for them at the top of the hill.

Mary, finding a comfortable seat for herself on the step of a stile, is very well satisfied so long as the others stand about her, but when Louisa draws Captain Wentworth away, to try for a gleaning of nuts in an adjoining hedgerow, and they go by degrees out of sight and sound, Mary is happy no longer. She is sure Louisa has got a better seat, and follows without finding her. Anne sees another nice seat for her sister, on a sunny bank under the hedgerow, but Mary quarrels with that also, and leaves Anne in possession. Anne is really tired, and sits on till she hears Captain Wentworth and Louisa in the hedgerow behind her, as if making their way back in the rough, wild sort of channel down the centre.

“Louisa’s first audible words showed that she was confiding to Captain Wentworth the secret of the walk, so far as it concerned herself and her sister, with a good deal more of the family history which explained the secret. “And so I made her go,” Anne heard Louisa say. “I could not bear that she should be frightened from the visit by such nonsense. What! would I be turned back from doing a thing I had determined to do, and that I knew to be right, by the airs and interference of such a person, or of any person, I may say?””

“She would have turned back then, but for you!”

“She would; indeed; I am almost ashamed to say it.”

“Happy for her to have such a mind as yours at hand,” exclaimed Captain Wentworth, hastily. “Woe betide him and her, too, when it comes to things of consequence, when they are placed in circumstances requiring fortitude and strength of mind, if she have not resolution enough to resist idle interference in such a trifle as this.” He dwells emphatically on the importance of firmness in all the relations of life, and winds up with the declaration: “My first wish for all[Pg 345] whom I am interested in, is that they should be firm. If Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful and happy in her November of life, she will cherish all her present powers of mind.”

“He had done and was unanswered. It would have surprised Anne if Louisa could have readily answered such a speech; words of such interest, spoken with such serious warmth. She could imagine what Louisa was feeling. For herself, she feared to move lest she should be seen. While she remained a bush of low rambling holly protected her, and they were moving on. Before they were beyond her hearing, Louisa spoke again.”

“Mary is good-natured enough in many respects,” said she; “but she does sometimes provoke me excessively with her nonsense and her pride—the Elliot pride. She has a great deal too much of the Elliot pride. We do so wish that Charles had married Anne instead. I suppose you know he wanted to marry Anne?”

After a moment’s pause, Captain Wentworth said, “Do you mean that she refused him?”

“Oh! yes, certainly.”

“When did that happen?”

“I do not exactly know, for Henrietta and I were at school at the time; but I believe about a year before he married Mary. We should all have liked her a great deal better; and papa and mamma always think it was her great friend Lady Russell’s doing that she did not. They think Charles might not be learned and bookish enough to please Lady Russell, and that, therefore, she persuaded Anne to refuse him.”

This was a travesty of the real state of matters with a vengeance; and there had been just that degree of feeling and curiosity about her in Captain Wentworth’s manner which must give Anne extreme agitation and keep her rooted to the spot, though she heard no more.

As soon as she could she went after Mary, and it is a relief when all the party are again collected, with the[Pg 346] addition of Charles Hayter, whom Charles Musgrove and Henrietta brought back with them as might have been conjectured. There had been a withdrawing on the gentleman’s side, a relenting on the lady’s, and they are very glad to be together again. Henrietta looks a little ashamed but very well pleased, Charles Hayter exceedingly happy, and they are devoted to each other on their way back to Uppercross.

Everything now marks out Louisa for Captain Wentworth, and they walk side by side nearly as much as the other two. The party are thus separated into three divisions, with Anne tired enough to be very glad of Charles Musgrove’s disengaged arm. “But Charles, though in very good humour with her, was out of temper with his wife. Mary had shown herself disobliging to him, and was now to reap the consequence, which consequence was his dropping her arm almost every moment to cut off the heads of some nettles in the hedge with his switch; and when Mary began to complain of it, and lament her being ill-used, according to custom, in being on the hedge-side, while Anne was never incommoded on the other, he dropped the arms of both, to hunt after a weasel which he had a momentary glimpse of, and they could hardly get him along at all.” This boyish mode of expressing a pet is exquisitely characteristic of the ordinarily easy-going young fellow.

“The long meadow bordered a lane which their footpath, at the end of it, was to cross, and when the party had all reached the gate of exit, the carriage advancing in the same direction, which had been some time heard, was just coming up, and proved to be Admiral Croft’s gig. He and his wife had taken their intended drive and were returning home. Upon hearing how long a walk the young people had engaged in, they kindly offered a seat to any lady who might be particularly tired; it would save her full a mile, and they were going through Uppercross. The invitation was general, and generally declined. The Misses Musgrove were not all tired, and Mary was either offended[Pg 347] by not being asked before any of the others, or what Louisa called the Elliot pride could not endure to make a third in a one-horse chaise.

“The walking party had crossed the lane and were surmounting an opposite stile, and the Admiral was putting his horse into motion again, when Captain Wentworth cleared the hedge in a moment to say something to his sister. The something might be guessed by its effects.

“‘Miss Elliot, I am sure you are tired,’ cried Mrs. Croft; ‘do let us have the pleasure of taking you home?’

“Anne was still in the lane, and though instinctively beginning to decline, she was not allowed to proceed. The Admiral’s kind urgency came in support of his wife’s, and Captain Wentworth, without saying a word, turned to her, and quietly obliged her to be assisted into the carriage.

“Yes, he had done it; she was in the carriage, and felt that he had placed her there, that his will and his hands had done it, that she owed it to his perception of her fatigue and his resolution to give her rest. He could not forgive her, but he could not be unfeeling. Though perfectly careless of her, and though becoming attached to another, still he could not see her suffer without the desire of giving her relief.”

III.
Captain Wentworth learns that there is an old mess-mate with his family settled for the winter at Lyme. He goes to visit them, and comes back with such a glowing description of the beautiful neighbourhood that the young people at Uppercross are all eager to see it. Although it is so late in the season, a party is made up, consisting of Charles Musgrove, Mary, Anne, Henrietta,[Pg 348] Louisa, and Captain Wentworth, to drive to Lyme, stay the night there, and come back for next day’s dinner. It is in connection with Lyme that we have Jane Austen’s most finished bit of descriptive landscape-painting. Full of appreciation as it reads, it is sober and restrained indeed, contrasted with modern word-painting of sea and shore and sky. “The remarkable situation of the town, the principal street almost hurrying into the water, the walk to the Cobbe skirting round the pleasant little bay, which in the season is animated with bathing machines and company; the Cobbe itself, its old wonders and new improvements, with the very beautiful line of cliffs stretching out to the east of the town, are what the stranger’s eye will seek; and a very strange stranger it must be who does not see charms in the immediate environs of Lyme to make him wish to know it better. The scenes in its neighbourhood,—Charmouth, with its high grounds and extensive sweeps of country, and still more its sweet retired bay, backed by dark cliffs, where fragments of low rock among the sands make it the happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide, for sitting in unwearied contemplation; the woody varieties of the cheerful village of Up-Lyme; and, above all, Pinney, with its green chasms between romantic rocks, where the scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant growth declare that many a generation must have passed away since the first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a state, where a scene so wonderful and so lovely is exhibited as may more than equal any of the resembling scenes of the far-famed Isle of Wight;—these places must be visited again and again to make the worth of Lyme understood.”

Not only Captain Harville, Captain Wentworth’s friend, and his wife are brought by Captain Wentworth to be introduced to his companions; Captain Benwick, another old friend, accompanies the others. Captain Benwick has a sad little history which renders him especially interesting. He had been engaged to Captain Harville’s sister, and is still mourning her loss. “They[Pg 349] had been a year or two waiting for fortune and promotion. Fortune came, his prize-money as lieutenant being great. Promotion, too, came at last; but Fanny did not live to know it. She had died the preceding summer when he was at sea.”

“And yet,” said Anne to herself, “he has not, perhaps, a more sorrowing heart than I have.”

Captain Harville, who looks sensible and benevolent, is delicate and lame. Captain Benwick has a pleasing face and a melancholy air, just as he ought to have. Mrs. Harville shows the same good feeling as her husband, and nothing can be more pleasant than their desire to consider the whole party as friends of their own.

Captains Harville and Benwick pay a visit to the inn in the evening. Captain Benwick’s spirits do not seem fit for the mirth of the party, and Anne kindly talks to him of their favourite books.

Anne and Henrietta, the earliest risers next morning, agree to take a stroll down to the sea before breakfast. Captain Wentworth and Louisa come after the two others. As they are all returning to town, at the steps leading up from the beach, a gentleman about to descend, politely draws back and waits. As they pass him Anne’s face catches his eye, and he looks at her with evident admiration. “She was looking remarkably well; her very regular, very pretty features having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine wind which had been blowing on her complexion, and by the animation of eye which it had produced. It was evident that the gentleman (completely a gentleman in manners) admired her exceedingly. Captain Wentworth looked round at her instantly in a way which showed his noticing it. He gave her a momentary glance, a glance of brightness, which seemed to say, ‘That man is struck with you, and even I at this moment see something like Anne Elliot again.’”

After the party have returned to the inn, Anne, in passing quickly from her own room to the dining-room, had nearly run against the same gentleman as he came[Pg 350] out of an adjoining apartment. “This second meeting, short as it was, also proved again, by the gentleman’s looks, that he thought hers very lovely, and by the readiness and propriety of his apologies, that he was a man of exceedingly good manners. He seemed about thirty, and though not handsome, had an agreeable person. Anne felt that she should like to know who he was.”

“They had nearly done breakfast when the sound of a carriage, almost the first they had heard since entering Lyme, drew half the party to the window. It was a gentleman’s carriage, a curricle, but only coming round from the stable-yard to the front door. Somebody must be going away. It was driven by a servant in mourning.

“The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up, that he might compare it with his own; and the whole six were collected to look, by the time the owner of the curricle was to be seen issuing from the door, amidst the bows and civilities of the household, and taking his seat to drive off.”

“Ah!” cried Captain Wentworth, instantly, and with half a glance at Anne, “it is the very man we passed.”

“The waiter came into the room soon afterwards.

“‘Pray,’ said Captain Wentworth, immediately, ‘can you tell us the name of the gentleman who has just gone away?’

“‘Yes, sir, a Mr. Elliot, a gentleman of large fortune, came in last night from Sidmouth, and going on now for Crewkerne, on his way to Bath and London.’

“‘Elliot!’ Many had looked at each other, and many had repeated the name before all this had been got through, even by the smart rapidity of a waiter.

“‘Bless me!’ cried Mary; ‘it must be our cousin, it must be our Mr. Elliot, it must, indeed!—Charles, Anne, must not it? In mourning, you see, just as our Mr. Elliot must be. How very extraordinary! In the[Pg 351] same inn with us, Anne; must not it be our Mr. Elliot, my father’s next heir? Pray, sir,’ turning to the waiter, ‘did not you hear—did not his servant say—whether he belonged to the Kellynch family?’

“‘No, ma’am; he did not mention no particular family; but he said his master was a very rich gentleman, and would be a baronight, some day.’

“‘There, you see,’ cried Mary, in an ecstacy, ‘just as I said! Heir to Sir Walter Elliot! I was sure that would come out, if it was so! Depend upon it, that is a circumstance which his servants take care to publish, wherever he goes. But, Anne, only conceive how extraordinary! I wish I had looked at him more. I wish we had been aware in time who it was, that he might have been introduced to us. What a pity that we should not have been introduced to each other! Do you think he had the Elliot countenance? I hardly looked at him, I was looking at the horses; but I think he had something of the Elliot countenance. I wonder the arms did not strike me. Oh! the great-coat was hanging over the panel, and hid the arms—so it did; otherwise, I am sure I should have observed them, and the livery, too. If the servant had not been in mourning, one should have known him by the livery.’

“‘Putting all these very extraordinary circumstances together,’ said Captain Wentworth, ‘we must consider it to be the arrangement of Providence that you should not be introduced to your cousin.’”

Though Anne tries to quiet Mary by reminding her of the terms on which her father is with his heir, still it is a secret gratification to have seen her cousin, and to know that the future owner of Kellynch is undoubtedly a gentleman, and has an air of good sense.

Breakfast over, Captain and Mrs. Harville, with Captain Benwick, arrive to join the visitors in their last walk about Lyme.

Captain Harville says aside to Anne that she has done a good deed in making that “poor fellow,” Captain Benwick, talk so much.

[Pg 352]

Anne reminds him gently of what time does in every case of affliction, and remarks that Captain Benwick’s is still of a recent date, only last summer.

“Ay, true enough,” with a deep sigh, “only June.”

“And not known to him, perhaps, so soon?”

“Not till the first week in August, when he came home from the Cape, just made into the Grappler. I was at Plymouth, dreading to hear of him; he sent in letters, but the Grappler was under orders for Portsmouth. There the news must follow him, but who was to tell it? Not I. I would as soon be run up to the yard-arm. Nobody could do it but that good fellow” (pointing to Captain Wentworth). “The Laconia had come into Plymouth the week before; no danger of her being sent to sea again. He stood his chance for the risk; wrote up for leave of absence, but without waiting the return, travelled night and day till he got to Portsmouth, rowed off to the Grappler that instant, and never left the poor fellow for a week. That’s what he did, and nobody else could have saved poor James. You may think, Miss Elliott, whether he is dear to us!”

The pleasure-seekers part with the Harvilles at their own door, and turn at the special request of Louisa Musgrove, with only Captain Benwick attending them to the last, to walk along the Cobbe once more, before setting out for Uppercross.

“There was too much wind to make the high part of the new Cobbe pleasant for the ladies, and they agreed to get down the steps to the lower, and all were contented to pass quietly and carefully down the steep flight excepting Louisa; she must be jumped down them by Captain Wentworth. In all their walks he had had to jump her from the stiles; the sensation was delightful to her. The hardness of the pavement for her feet made him less willing upon the present occasion; he did it, however, she was safely down, and instantly to show her enjoyment, ran up the steps to be jumped down again. He advised her against it, thought the jar too great; but no, he reasoned and talked in vain, she[Pg 353] smiled and said, ‘I am determined I will;’ he put out his hands; she was too precipitate by half a second, she fell on the pavement on the Lower Cobbe, and was taken up lifeless! There was no wound, no blood, no visible bruise; but her eyes were closed, she breathed not, her face was like death. The horror of that moment to all that stood around!

“Captain Wentworth, who had caught her up, knelt with her in his arms, looking on her with a face as pallid as her own, in an agony of silence. ‘She is dead! She is dead!’ screamed Mary, catching hold of her husband, and contributing with his own horror to make him immovable; and in another moment Henrietta, sinking under the conviction, lost her senses too, and would have fallen on the steps but for Captain Benwick and Anne, who caught and supported her between them.”

“‘Is there no one to help me?’ were the first words which burst from Captain Wentworth in a tone of despair, and as if all his own strength were gone.

“‘Go to him! go to him!’ cried Anne; ‘for Heaven’s sake go to him. I can support her myself. Leave me and go to him. Rub her hands, rub her temples! here are salts;[74] take them, take them!’”

Captain Benwick obeyed, and Charles at the same moment disengaging himself from his wife, they were both with him, and Louisa was raised up and supported more firmly between them, and everything was done that Anne had prompted, but in vain; while Captain Wentworth, staggering against the wall for his support, exclaimed, in the bitterest agony, “Oh, God! her father and mother!”

“A surgeon!” said Anne. He caught the word; it seemed to rouse him at once, and saying only, “True, true, a surgeon this instant,” was darting away, when Anne eagerly suggested—

[Pg 354]

“Captain Benwick! would it not be better for Captain Benwick? He knows where a surgeon is to be found.”

“Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of the idea, and in a moment (it was all done in rapid moments) Captain Benwick had resigned the poor corpse-like figure entirely to the brother’s care, and was off for the town with the utmost rapidity.

“As to the wretched party left behind, it could scarcely be said which of the three, who were completely rational, was suffering most; Captain Wentworth, Anne, and Charles who, really a very affectionate brother, hung over Louisa with sobs of grief, and could only turn his eyes from one sister to see the other in a state as insensible, or to witness the hysterical agitation of his wife, calling on him for help which he could not give.

“Anne, attending with all the strength and zeal and thought which instinct supplied, to Henrietta, still tried at intervals to suggest comfort to the others, tried to quiet Mary, to animate Charles, to assuage the feelings of Captain Wentworth. Both seemed to look to her for directions.[75]

“‘Anne, Anne!’ cried Charles, ‘what is to be done next? What, in Heaven’s name, is to be done next?’

“Captain Wentworth’s eyes were also turned towards her.

“‘Had she not better be carried to the inn? Yes, I am sure; carry her gently to the inn.’

“‘Yes, yes, to the inn,’ repeated Captain Wentworth, comparatively collected and eager to be doing something. ‘I will carry her myself.’”

The Harvilles meet the melancholy cavalcade, and Louisa is carried to their house instead of to the inn. A surgeon pronounces that her limbs have escaped, and[Pg 355] though there is concussion of the brain, the case is not by any means hopeless.

In the end, Captain Wentworth, Henrietta Musgrove, and Anne return to Uppercross to break the news of the accident to the old Musgroves, while Charles and Mary remain with the sufferer.

“It was growing quite dusk, however, before the travellers were in the neighbourhood of Uppercross, and there had been total silence among them for some time, Henrietta leaning back in the corner, with a shawl over her face, giving the hope of her having cried herself to sleep; when, as they were going up their last hill, Anne found herself all at once addressed by Captain Wentworth. In a low, cautious voice, he said, “I have been considering what we had best do. She must not appear at first. She could not stand it. I have been thinking whether you had not better remain in the carriage with her while I go in and break it to Mr. and Mrs. Musgrove. Do you think this a good plan?”

“She did; he was satisfied and said no more. But the remembrance of the appeal remained a pleasure to her, as a proof of friendship and of deference for her judgment; a great pleasure, and when it became a sort of parting proof its value did not lessen.

“When the distressing communication at Uppercross was over, and he had seen the father and mother quite as composed as could be hoped, and the daughter all the better for being with them, he announced his intention of returning in the same carriage to Lyme, and when the horses were baited, he was off.”

Anne only remains two days longer at Uppercross with the Musgroves. The accounts which Charles Musgrove brings of Louisa are favourable on the whole. A speedy cure cannot be looked for, but she is going on as well as can be expected. The Harvilles are kindness itself.

Anne persuades Mr. and Mrs. Musgrove and Henrietta to join the others by going into lodgings at Lyme. They can at least be of use by taking care of the Harville[Pg 356] children. “They were so happy in the decision that Anne was delighted with what she had done, and felt that she could not spend her last morning at Uppercross better, than in assisting their preparations and sending them off at an early hour, though her being left to the solitary range of the house was the consequence.

“She was the last, excepting the little boys, at the Cottage; she was the very last, the only remaining one of all that had filled and animated both houses, of all that had given Uppercross its cheerful character. A few days had made a change indeed.

“If Louisa recovered, it would all be the same, more than former happiness would be restored. There could not be a doubt, to her mind there was none, of what would follow her recovery. A few months hence, and the rooms now deserted, occupied but by her silent, pensive self, might be filled again with all that was happy and gay, all that was glowing and bright in prosperous love, all that was most unlike Anne Elliot.”

I think my readers will endorse the cordial praise bestowed by Captain Harville on Anne at a later part of the story: “good soul!” The simple words may be lightly esteemed, as they are frequently bestowed indiscriminately and contemptuously—and what a lowered standard of morality the contempt involves—but how much they imply. Good, true, courageous, christian Anne Elliot, true to herself, to Captain Wentworth, to Louisa Musgrove, to every living creature! Anne Elliot is worth scores—hundreds—of the outrageous, reckless, self-indulgent, and idiotic heroines frequently held up for admiration and imitation.

IV.
At Kellynch Lodge, with Lady Russell, Anne has to fall into a new, or rather an old set of interests, in which[Pg 357] the house her father has taken in Camden Place, Bath, and the disagreeable fact that Mrs. Clay, the daughter of Sir Walter Elliott’s agent, and a humble companion of Elizabeth, is still on a visit there, figure prominently; while Anne’s thoughts are still hovering, in spite of herself, about Lyme and her friends there.

Elizabeth Elliott’s last letter to Kellynch Lodge has communicated an unexpected piece of news of some interest. There has been a reconciliation between the head of the house and his heir. Mr. Elliot is in Bath, and has called more than once or twice in Camden Place. If Elizabeth and her father are right, he is now as anxious to renew and proclaim the connexion as he had formerly been to treat it with scorn.

A degree of unlooked-for warmth in the welcome home which Anne receives does her good, but Jane Austen is careful to mention that Anne’s father and sister are glad to see her for the sake of showing her the house and furniture. Besides, they are unwontedly happy in finding themselves people of consequence in Bath, and in receiving once more the attentions of Mr. Elliot. He is now everything and without a fault in his cousins’ eyes. Even the old offence of his marriage—when Sir Walter had destined him for Elizabeth, and Elizabeth had fully acquiesced in the arrangement—has been partly smoothed away. A friend of Mr. Elliot’s, a Colonel Wallis, whom Mr. Elliot has introduced to Sir Walter, mentions in confidence various particulars which soften the delinquency. The late Mrs. Elliot had not been a woman of family, but she had been a very fine woman, with a large fortune, excessively in love with her husband.

Anne is rendered very uneasy by Mrs. Clay’s protracted stay in Camden Place, and by the increasing influence she is gaining over her host as well as over his eldest daughter. That Mrs. Clay cherishes designs of becoming Lady Elliot, opposed as the match might seem to Sir Walter’s vanity and conceit, Anne does not doubt, and she begins to fear more and more that Mrs.[Pg 358] Clay’s designs may prove successful. How relentlessly Anne is made to gauge her father’s character is shown by the impetus given to her fears, in the course of a conversation with him. He has just complimented Anne on her greater clearness and freshness of complexion, and attributed the improvement to Gowland’s Lotion. On her saying she uses no lotion, he expresses his surprise. She cannot do better than she is doing, otherwise he would recommend Gowland—the constant use of Gowland during the spring. Mrs. Clay has been using it at his recommendation, and Anne can see what it has done for her; Anne can see how it has carried away her freckles.

The most alarming symptom of all is, that it does not appear to Anne Mrs. Clay’s freckles are lessened.

But there is no use in warning Elizabeth, without whose countenance Mrs. Clay could not stay on in Camden Place. Mrs. Clay’s flattery infatuates Elizabeth, and in any circumstances she would have been incapable of accepting beforehand a suggestion so injurious and disagreeable to her, especially if it came from her sister Anne.

Lady Russell is quite won by Mr. Elliot, whose steadiness of character and coolness of judgment, in addition to what she believes to be his high principles and warmth of heart, unite all the recommendations which she prizes most highly. She is delighted to find that his previous marriage—suspected to have been an unhappy one—has not soured him, or prevented him from thinking of another wife—not in the person of Elizabeth, but in that of Anne Elliot, as is soon plain to Lady Russell. She rejoices to believe that Anne is at last done justice to, in becoming the object of Mr. Elliot’s constant presence in Camden Place. Anne, in her turn, allows herself to be more and more pleased with her cousin’s good qualities and friendship, although she still retains doubts of the consistency of his sentiments and behaviour, and of the motives which actuate him.

[Pg 359]

V.
A grand triumph is provided for Sir Walter and his eldest daughter, which in the meantime may happily prove a distraction and protection to the former from the arts of Mrs. Clay. “The Bath paper one morning announced the arrival of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple and her daughter, the Honourable Miss Carteret, and all the comfort of No. —, Camden Place, was swept away for many days; for the Dalrymples (in Anne’s opinion, most unfortunately) were cousins of the Elliots, and the agony was how to introduce themselves properly.”

The feat is accomplished, and the Elliots visit in Laura Place, where the Dowager Viscountess has established herself. They have the cards of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple and the Honourable Miss Carteret to be arranged wherever they may be most visible, and “our cousins in Laura Place,” “our cousins Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret,” are talked of to everybody.

While Sir Walter and Elizabeth Elliot are sedulously cultivating their noble cousins, Anne, in broad contrast to her father and sister, is gladly renewing her acquaintance with an old schoolfellow whom she discovers in Bath in reduced circumstances: Mrs. Smith, as Miss Hamilton, had been kind to Anne Elliot, and now it is Anne’s turn to repay the kindness. Mrs. Smith is a widow, and poor. She is also for the present a complete cripple from the effects of rheumatic fever, though she is not more than thirty-one years of age. She has come to Bath on account of her lameness, and is living in a humble way near the hot baths. A mutual friend makes Anne acquainted with the position of her former schoolfellow. The first meeting is awkward and painful. Twelve years have changed Anne from the blooming, silent, unformed girl of fifteen, to the elegant little woman of eight-and-twenty; and[Pg 360] twelve years have transformed the fine-looking, well-grown Miss Hamilton, in all the glow of health and confidence of prosperity, into a poor, infirm, helpless widow.

But soon the old interest which the girl-friends had felt in each other, revives. Anne finds Mrs. Smith sensible and agreeable, and has reason to admire in her “that elasticity of spirit, that disposition to be comforted, that power of turning readily from evil to good, and of finding employment out of herself, which is the choicest gift of Heaven.”[76]

It is February, a month since Anne had come to Bath. She is eager for news from Uppercross, when a thicker letter than usual is delivered to her from Mary, with Admiral and Mrs. Croft’s compliments. The Crofts must be in Bath.

Mary begins in her usual strain, with many grievances, congratulating herself, however, that the holidays are over. She believes no children ever had such long holidays as the young Musgroves have. The carriage has gone that day to bring Louisa and the Harvilles on the following day. Charles and Mary are not invited to dine with them, however, till the day after, and so on, to the close. But Mary has put the letter into an envelope containing as much more writing, which like the typical postscript is the cream of the epistle:—“I have something to communicate that will astonish you not a little. She (Louisa) and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very safely, and in the evening we went to ask how she did; when we were rather surprised not to find Captain Benwick of the party, for he had been invited as well as the Harvilles; and what do you think was the reason? Neither more nor less than his being in love with Louisa, and not choosing to venture to Uppercross till he had had[Pg 361] an answer from Mr. Musgrove; for it was all settled between him and her before she came away, and he had written to her father by Captain Harville. True, upon my honour! Are you not astonished? I shall be surprised at least if you ever received a hint of it, for I never did. Mrs. Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the matter. We are all very well pleased, however; for though it is not equal to her marrying Captain Wentworth, it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter; and Mr. Musgrove has written his consent, and Captain Benwick is expected to-day. Mrs. Harville says her husband feels a good deal on his poor sister’s account; but, however, Louisa is a great favourite with both. Indeed, Mrs. Harville and I quite agree that we love her the better for having nursed her. Charles wonders what Captain Wentworth will say; but if you remember I never thought him attached to Louisa; I never could see anything of it. And this is the end, you see, of Captain Benwick’s being supposed to be an admirer of yours. How Charles could take such a thing into his head was always incomprehensible to me. I hope he will be more agreeable now. Certainly not a great match for Louisa Musgrove, but a million times better than marrying amongst the Hayters.”

“Mary need not have feared her sister’s being in any degree prepared for the news. She had never in her life been more astonished. Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove! It was almost too wonderful for belief, and it was with the greatest effort that she could remain in the room, preserve an air of calmness, and endure the common questions of the moment.”

“In her own room she tried to comprehend it. Well might Charles wonder how Captain Wentworth would feel! Perhaps he had quitted the field, had given Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found he did not love her. She could not endure the idea of treachery or levity, or anything akin to ill-usage between him and his friend.”

“Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove! The[Pg 362] high-spirited, joyous, talking Louisa Musgrove, and the dejected, thinking, feeling, reading Captain Benwick, seemed each of them everything that would not suit the other. Their minds must be dissimilar! Where could have been the attraction? The answer soon presented itself: it had been in situation. They had been thrown together several weeks; they had been living in the same small family party. Since Henrietta’s coming away, they must have been depending almost entirely on each other, and Louisa, just recovering from illness, had been in an interesting state, and Captain Benwick was not inconsolable.

“She saw no reason against their being happy. Louisa had fine naval fervour to begin with, and they would soon grow more alike. He would gain cheerfulness, and she would have to be an enthusiast for Scott and Lord Byron; nay, that was probably learnt already: of course they had fallen in love over poetry. The idea of Louisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary taste and sentimental reflection was amusing, but she had no doubt of its being so. The day at Lyme, the fall from the Cobbe, might influence her health, her nerves, her courage, her character to the end of her life, as thoroughly as it appeared to have influenced her fate.”[77]

VI.
Captain Wentworth is on his way to Bath, and the very next time Anne walks out she meets him. “Mr. Elliot was attending his two cousins and Mrs. Clay. They were in Milsom Street. It began to rain, not much, but enough to make shelter desirable for women, and quite enough to make it very desirable for Miss[Pg 363] Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed home in Lady Dalrymple’s carriage, which was seen waiting at a little distance. She, Anne, and Mrs. Clay, therefore, turned into Molland’s, while Mr. Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple to request her assistance. He soon joined them again, successful, of course: Lady Dalrymple would be most happy to take them home, and would call for them in a few minutes.

“Her ladyship’s carriage was a barouche, and did not hold more than four with any comfort. Miss Carteret was with her mother; consequently it was not reasonable to expect accommodation for all the three Camden Place ladies. There could be no doubt as to Miss Elliot, but it occupied a little time to settle the point of civility between the other two. The rain was a mere trifle, and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with Mr. Elliot. But the rain was also a mere trifle to Mrs. Clay; she would hardly allow it even to drop at all, and her boots were so thick—much thicker than Miss Anne’s; in short, her civility rendered her quite as anxious to be left to walk with Mr. Elliot as Anne could be, and it was discussed between them with a generosity so polite and so determined, that the others were obliged to settle it for them, Miss Elliot maintaining that Mrs. Clay had a little cold already, and Mr. Elliot deciding on appeal that his cousin Anne’s boots were rather the thickest.

“It was fixed, accordingly, that Mrs. Clay should be of the party in the carriage; and they had just reached this point when Anne, as she sat near the window, descried most decidedly and distinctly Captain Wentworth walking down the street.

“Her start was perceptible only to herself; but she instantly felt that she was the greatest simpleton in the[Pg 364] world, the most unaccountable and absurd. For a few minutes she saw nothing before her; it was all confusion. She was lost, and when she had scolded back her senses, she found the others still waiting, and Mr. Elliot (always obliging) just setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mrs. Clay’s.

“She now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door. Captain Wentworth must be out of sight. She would see if it rained. She was sent back, however, in a moment by the entrance of Captain Wentworth himself, among a party of gentlemen and ladies, evidently his acquaintance, and whom he must have joined a little below Milsom Street. He was more obviously struck and confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed before. He looked quite red. For the first time since their renewed acquaintance she felt she was betraying the least sensibility of the two. She had the advantage of him in the preparation of the last few moments. All the overpowering, blinding, bewildering, first effects of strong surprise were over with her; still, however, she had enough to feel. It was agitation, pain, pleasure—a something between delight and misery.

“He spoke to her, and then turned away. The character of his manner was embarrassment. She could not have called it either cold, or friendly, or anything so certainly as embarrassed.

“After a short interval, however, he came towards her, and spoke again. Mutual inquiries on common subjects passed, neither of them much the wiser for what they heard, and Anne continuing fully sensible of his being less at ease than formerly. They had, by dint of being so much together, got to speak to each other with a considerable portion of apparent indifference and calmness, but he could not do it now. Time had changed him, or Louisa had changed him. There was consciousness of some sort or other. He looked very well, not as if he had been suffering either in health or spirits; and he talked of Uppercross, of the Musgroves—nay,[Pg 365] even of Louisa—and had even a momentary look of his own arch significance as he named her; but yet it was Captain Wentworth, not comfortable, not easy, not able to feign that he was.

“It did not surprise but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabeth would not know him. She saw that he saw Elizabeth; that Elizabeth saw him; that there was complete internal recognition on each side. She was convinced that he was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance, expecting it, and she had the pain of seeing her sister turn away with unalterable coldness.

“Lady Dalrymple’s carriage, for which Miss Elliot was growing very impatient, now drew up; the servant came in to announce it. It was beginning to rain again, and altogether there was a delay, and a bustle, and a talking which must make all the little crowd in the shop understand that Lady Dalrymple was calling to convey Miss Elliot. At last Miss Elliot and her friend, unattended but by the servant (for there was no cousin returned), were walking off, and Captain Wentworth, watching them, turned again to Anne, and by manner, rather than words, was offering his services to her.

“‘I am much obliged to you,’ was her answer, ‘but I am not going with them. The carriage would not accommodate so many. I walk: I prefer walking.’

“‘But it rains.’

“‘Oh, very little. Nothing that I regard.’

“After a moment’s pause he said, ‘Although I came only yesterday, I have equipped myself properly for Bath already, you see’—pointing to a new umbrella. ‘I wish you would make use of it, if you are determined to walk, though I think it would be more prudent to let me get you a chair.’

“She was very much obliged to him, but declined it all, repeating her conviction that the rain would come to nothing at present, and adding, ‘I am only waiting for Mr. Elliot. He will be here in a moment, I am sure.’

[Pg 366]

“She had hardly spoken the words when Mr. Elliot walked in. Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly. There was no difference between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme, admiring Anne as she passed, except in the air, and look, and manners of the privileged relation and friend. He came in with eagerness, and appeared to see and think only of her, apologised for his stay, was grieved to have kept her waiting, and anxious to get her away without further loss of time and before the rain increased; and in another moment they walked off together, her arm under his, a gentle and embarrassed glance and a ‘Good morning to you’ being all that she had time for as she passed away.

“As soon as they were out of sight the ladies and Captain Wentworth’s party began talking of them.

“‘Mr. Elliot does not dislike his cousin, I fancy.’

“‘Oh, no! that is clear enough. One can guess what will happen there. He is always with them; half lives in the family, I believe. What a very good-looking man!’

“‘Yes, and Miss Atkinson, who dined with him once at the Wallises, says he is the most agreeable man she ever was in company with.’

“‘She is pretty, I think, Anne Elliott, very pretty, when one comes to look at her. It is not the fashion to say so, but I confess I admire her more than her sister.’

“‘Oh, so do I.’

“‘And so do I. No comparison. But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot. Anne is too delicate for them.’”

A day or two passes without further encounters. Anne longs for a concert patronised by Lady Dalrymple. “Sir Walter, his two daughters, and Mrs. Clay were the earliest of all their party at the Rooms in the evening, and as Lady Dalrymple must be waited for, they took their station by one of the fires in the Octagon Room. But hardly were they so settled, when the door opened[Pg 367] again, and Captain Wentworth walked in alone. Anne was the nearest to him, and making yet a little advance, she instantly spoke. He was preparing only to bow and pass on, but her gentle ‘How do you do?’ brought him out of the straight line, to stand near her and make inquiries in return, in spite of the formidable father and sister in the background.

“While they were speaking, a whispering between her father and Elizabeth caught her ear. She could not distinguish, but she must guess the subject, and on Captain Wentworth making a distant bow, she comprehended that her father had judged so well as to give him that simple acknowledgment of acquaintance, and she was just in time by a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself. This, though late and reluctant and ungracious, was yet better than nothing, and her spirits improved.

“After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath, and the concert, their conversation began to flag, and so little was said at last, that she was expecting him to go every moment; but he did not; he seemed in no hurry to leave her; and presently, with renewed spirit, with a little smile, a little glow, he said—

“‘I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme. I am afraid you must have suffered from the shock, and the more from its not overpowering you at the time.’

“She assured him she had not.

“‘It was a frightful hour,’ said he, ‘a frightful day!’ and he passed his hand across his eyes, as if the remembrance were still too painful; but in a moment, half smiling again, added, ‘The day has produced some effects, however; has had some consequences which must be considered the reverse of frightful. When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would be the properest person to fetch a surgeon, you could have little idea of his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery.’

“‘Certainly, I could have none. But it appears—I[Pg 368] should hope it would be—a very happy match. There are on both sides good principles and good temper.’

“‘Yes,’ said he, looking not exactly forward; ‘but there I think ends the resemblance. With all my soul I wish them happy, and rejoice over every circumstance in favour of it. They have no difficulties to contend with at home, no opposition, no caprice, no delays. The Musgroves are behaving like themselves, most honourable and kindly, only anxious with true parental heart to promote their daughter’s comfort. All this is much, very much in favour of their happiness; more than perhaps——’

“He stopped; a sudden recollection seemed to occur, and to give him some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne’s cheeks and fixing her eyes on the ground. After clearing his throat, however, he proceeded thus—‘I confess I do think there is a disparity, too great a disparity, and in a point no less essential than mind. I regard Louisa Musgrove as a very amiable, sweet-tempered girl, and not deficient in understanding; but Benwick is something more. He is a clever man, a reading man; and I confess that I do consider his attaching himself to her with some surprise. Had it been the effect of gratitude, had he learnt to love her because he believed her to be preferring him,[78] it would have been another thing. But I have no reason to suppose it so. It seems, on the contrary, to have been a perfectly spontaneous, untaught feeling on his side, and this surprises me. A man like him, in his situation, with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken! Fanny Harville was a very superior creature, and his attachment to her was indeed attachment. A man does not recover from such a devotion of the heart to such a woman! He ought not; he does not.’

“Either from the consciousness, however, that his friend had recovered, or from some other consciousness, he went no farther; and Anne, who—in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered,[Pg 369] and in spite of all the various noises of the room, the almost ceaseless slam of the door, and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through—had distinguished every word, was struck, gratified, confused, and beginning to breathe very quick, and feel a hundred things in a moment.”

The entrance-door opens again, and “Lady Dalrymple, Lady Dalrymple!” is the welcome sound. Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret, escorted by Mr. Elliot and Colonel Wallis, advance into the room. Anne is included in the group and separated from Captain Wentworth. But she has learnt in the last ten minutes more of his feelings towards Louisa, more of all his feelings, than she dares to think of.

Upon Lady Russell’s appearance, the whole party proceed to go into the concert-room, and be of all the consequence in their power; draw as many eyes, excite as many whispers, and disturb as many people as they can.

“Very, very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in. Elizabeth, arm-in-arm with Miss Carteret, and looking on the broad back of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before her, had nothing to wish for which did not seem within her reach; and Anne—but it would be an insult to the nature of Anne’s felicity to draw any comparison between it and her sister’s—the origin of one all selfish vanity, of the other all generous attachment.

“Anne saw nothing, thought nothing of the brilliancy of the room; the happiness was from within. Her eyes were bright and her cheeks glowed, but she knew nothing about it. His choice of subjects, his expressions, and still more his manner and look, had been such as she could see in only one light. His opinion of Louisa Musgrove’s inferiority—an opinion which he had seemed solicitous to give—his wonder at Captain Benwick, his feelings as to a fresh, strong attachment, sentences begun which he could not finish, his half-averted eyes, and more than half-expressive[Pg 370] glances—all, all declared that he had a heart returning to her at least; that anger, resentment, avoidance were no more, and that they were succeeded, not merely by friendship and regard, but by the tenderness of the past; yes, some share of the tenderness of the past! He must love her.”

Anne Elliot is from first to last full of delicate self-respect and retiring womanliness, yet Jane Austen makes her as incapable of resentful obduracy to Captain Wentworth’s tardy relenting, as of coquettish trifling with his revived affection. Anne is eager and willing to meet his overtures half way, and relieve him of the awkwardness of making them unsupported. To see her manner quite in the right light, one must remember what she owed him, for the wrong which she had done to both when she gave him up in the past. Her present free forgiveness of his recent avoidance and neglect hardly balances her renunciation of him eight years before.

“The party were divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches: Anne was among those on the foremost, and Mr. Elliot had manœuvred so well, with the assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis, as to have a seat by her. Miss Elliot, surrounded by her cousins, and the principal object of Colonel Wallis’s gallantry, was quite contented.”

Anne has never liked a concert better—at least, during the first act. Towards the close of it, the necessity of explaining the words of an Italian song[79] to Mr. Elliot, brings down upon her rather too many gallant compliments from the gentleman. In the course of his praise, he manages to rouse her curiosity by hinting that he may have had longer acquaintance with her tastes and pursuits than she is aware of. In answer to her questions, he assures her that he has known her by report, long before she came to Bath. He has heard her described by one who knew her intimately. Her person,[Pg 371] disposition, accomplishments, manner, were all familiar to him many years before.

Jane Austen remarks with great truth that no one can withstand the charm of such a mystery. “To have been described, long ago, to a recent acquaintance by nameless people, is irresistible. She wondered and questioned him eagerly, but in vain. He delighted in being asked, but he would not tell.”

Anne can only think of Mr. Wentworth, the former curate of Monksford, in whose company Mr. Elliot may have been, but she does not mention the name.

“The name of Anne Elliot,” said he, “has long had an interesting sound to me. Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy; and if I dared I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change.”

Before Anne can attempt an answer, she catches the name of Wentworth mentioned by her father in answer to an observation of Lady Dalrymple’s: and from the lady, “A very fine young man, indeed. More air than one often sees in Bath. Irish, I dare say?”

“Anne’s eyes had caught the right direction, and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing among a cluster of men at a little distance. As her eyes fell upon him, his seemed to be withdrawn from her.

“When she could give another glance, he had moved away. He could not have come nearer to her if he would, she was so surrounded and shut in, but she would rather have caught his eye.

“Mr. Elliot’s speech, too, distressed her. She had no longer any inclination to talk to him. She wished him not so near her.

“The first act was over. Now she hoped for some beneficial change; and after a period of nothing-saying amongst the party, some of them did decide on going in quest of tea. Anne was one of the few who did not choose to move. She remained in her seat, and so did Lady Russell, but she had the pleasure of getting rid of Mr. Elliot; and she did not mean, whatever she might feel on Lady Russell’s account, to shrink from[Pg 372] conversation with Captain Wentworth if he gave her opportunity. She was persuaded by Lady Russell’s countenance that she had seen him.

“He did not come, however. The others returned, the room filled again, benches were re-claimed, and re-possessed.

“In re-settling themselves there were many changes, the result of which was favourable for her. Colonel Wallis declined sitting down again, and Mr. Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Miss Carteret, in a manner not to be refused, to sit between them; and by some other removals, and a little scheming of her own, Anne was enabled to place herself much nearer the end of the bench than she had been before, much more within the reach of a passer-by. She could not do so without comparing herself with Miss Larolles, the inimitable Miss Larolles;[80] but still, she did it, and not with much happier effect, though she found herself at the very end of the bench before the concert closed.

“Such was her situation, with a vacant space at hand, when Captain Wentworth was again in sight. She saw him not far off; he saw her, too, yet he looked grave, and seemed irresolute, and only by very slow degrees came at last near enough to speak to her. She felt that something must be the matter. The difference between his present air and what it had been in the Octagon Room was strikingly great. Why was it? She thought of her father—of Lady Russell. Could there have been any unpleasant glances? He begun by speaking of the concert gravely, more like the Captain Wentworth of Uppercross; owned himself disappointed; had expected better singing; and, in short, must confess that he should not be sorry when it was over. Anne replied, and spoke of the performance so well, yet, in allowance for his feelings, so pleasantly, that his countenance improved, and he replied again, with almost a smile. They talked for a few minutes more; the improvement held: he even looked down[Pg 373] towards the bench, as if he saw a place on it well worth occupying; when, at that moment, a touch on her shoulder obliged her to turn round. It came from Mr. Elliot. He begged her pardon, but she must be applied to, to explain Italian again. Miss Carteret was very anxious to have a general idea of what was next to be sung. Anne could not refuse, but never had she sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit.

“A few minutes, though as few as possible, were inevitably consumed; and when her own mistress again—when able to turn and look, as she had done before—she found herself accosted by Captain Wentworth in a reserved yet hurried sort of farewell. He must wish her good night; he was going; he should get home as fast as he could.

“‘Is not the song worth staying for?’ said Anne, suddenly struck by an idea which made her yet more anxious to be encouraging.

“‘No!’ he replied, impressively; ‘there is nothing worth my staying for;’ and he was gone directly.

“‘Jealousy of Mr. Elliot.’ It was the only intelligible motive.”

During a call made on her old friend, Mrs. Smith, Anne is enlightened beyond the power of doubt with regard to her cousin, Mr. Elliot’s, unprincipled and heartless character. He was an old friend of the Smiths, and had long ago heard a great deal from Mrs. Smith about Anne Elliot. He helped to ruin Mr. Smith. He forsook the widow in her desolation. He has come to Bath for the purpose of preventing Sir Walter Elliot’s marriage to Mrs. Clay, with the probable loss of his own succession to the baronetcy. His admiration for Anne induces Mr. Elliot to propose to give himself the right of a son-in-law to hinder the consummation of her father’s folly.

Anne can only shudder at what might have been the possibility of such a marriage for her.

[Pg 374]

VII.[81]
Anne is just setting out for Lady Russell’s when a knock at the door announces visitors, and Mr. and Mrs. Charles Musgrove are ushered into the room.

Anne is really glad to see them, and the others are not so sorry that they cannot put on a decent air of welcome, considerably increased when it is clear that these their nearest relatives have not arrived with any idea of accommodation in that house.

The young Musgroves are staying for a few days at the “White Hart” with old Mrs. Musgrove, Henrietta, and Captain Harville. The last has business of his own in Bath. Mrs. Musgrove and Henrietta are already come to buy wedding clothes. It was not then incumbent on every bride, in the rank of Henrietta and Louisa Musgrove, to have her trousseau from London and Paris. Such a place as Bath was sufficient for the requirements of all Somersetshire in that respect.

Anne walks off directly with Charles and Mary to their mother and sister. The enlightenment of Lady Russell is of necessity left for another day. Mr. Elliot’s character has a reprieve of twenty-four hours.

Anne finds herself warmly greeted, even affectionately claimed to be with them during their stay, by Mrs. Musgrove and Henrietta, and falls naturally into her wonted ways of attention and assistance. “On Charles leaving them together, Anne was listening to Mrs. Musgrove’s history of Louisa, and to Henrietta’s of herself; giving opinions on business and recommendations to shops, with intervals of every help which Mary required; from altering her ribbon to settling her accounts, from finding her keys and assorting her trinkets, to trying to convince her she was not ill-used by anybody; while Mary, well amused as she generally[Pg 375] was in her station at a window overlooking the entrance to the Pump-room, could not but have her moments of imagining.

“A morning of thorough confusion was to be expected. A large party in an hotel ensured a quick-changing, unsettled scene. One five minutes brought a note, the next a parcel; and Anne had not been there half an hour when their dining-room, spacious as it was, seemed half-filled. A party of steady old friends were seated round Mrs. Musgrove, and Charles came back with Captains Harville and Wentworth. The appearance of the latter could not be more than the surprise of the moment. It was impossible for her to have forgotten to feel that this arrival of their common friends must be soon bringing them together again. Their last meeting had been most important in opening his feelings; she had derived from it a delightful conviction; but she feared from his looks that the same unfortunate persuasion, which had hastened him away from the Concert-room, still governed. He did not seem to want to be near enough for conversation.

“‘Anne,’ cried Mary, still at her window, ‘there is Mrs. Clay, I am sure, standing under the colonnade, and a gentleman with her. I saw them turn the corner from Bath Street just now. They seem deep in talk. Who is it? Come and tell me. Good heavens! I recollect. It is Mr. Elliot himself.’

“‘No,’ cried Anne, quickly; ‘it cannot be. He was to leave Bath at nine this morning, and does not come back till to-morrow.’

“As she spoke she felt that Captain Wentworth was looking at her, the consciousness of which vexed and embarrassed her, and made her regret that she had said so much, simple as it was.

“Mary, resenting that she should be supposed not to know her own cousin, began talking very warmly about the family features, and protesting still more positively that it was Mr. Elliot, calling again upon Anne to come and look herself; but Anne did not mean to stir, and[Pg 376] tried to be cool and unconcerned. Her distress returned, however, on perceiving smiles and intelligent glances pass between two or three of the lady visitors, as if they believed themselves quite in the secret. It was evident that the report concerning her had spread, and a short pause succeeded, which seemed to ensure that it would now spread further.

“‘Do come, Anne,’ cried Mary—‘come and look yourself. You will be too late if you do not make haste. They are parting—they are shaking hands—he is turning away. Not know Mr. Elliot, indeed! You seem to have forgot all about Lyme.’

“To pacify Mary, and perhaps screen her own embarrassment, Anne did move quietly to the window. She was just in time to ascertain that it really was Mr. Elliot before he disappeared on one side, as Mrs. Clay walked quickly off on the other; and checking the surprise which she could not but feel at such an appearance of friendly conference between two persons of totally opposite interests, she calmly said, ‘Yes, it is Mr. Elliot, certainly. He has changed his hour of going, I suppose, that is all, or I may be mistaken,’ and walked back to her chair recomposed, and with the comfortable hope of having acquitted herself well.

“Captain Wentworth left his seat and walked to the fire-place, probably for the sake of walking away from it soon afterwards, and taking a station, with less barefaced design, by Anne.

“‘You have not been long enough in Bath,’ said he, ‘to enjoy the evening parties of the place.’

“‘Oh, no, the usual character of them has nothing for me. I am no card-player.’

“‘You were not formerly, I know. You did not use to like cards, but time makes many changes.’

“‘I am not yet so much changed,’ cried Anne, and stopped, fearing she hardly knew what misconstruction. After waiting a few moments, he said, and as if it were the result of immediate feeling, ‘It is a period, indeed! Eight years and a half is a period.’

[Pg 377]

“Whether he would have proceeded farther was left to Anne’s imagination to ponder over in a calmer hour; for while still hearing the sounds he had uttered, she was startled to other subjects by Henrietta, eager to get out and calling on her companions to lose no time, lest somebody else should come in.

“They were obliged to move. Anne talked of being perfectly ready, and tried to look it; but she felt that could Henrietta have known the regret and reluctance of her heart in quitting the room, she would have found, in all her own sensations for her cousin, in the very security of his affection, wherewith to pity her.”

Their preparations are stopped short; the door is thrown open for Sir Walter and Miss Elliot, whose entrance seems to cause a general chill.

Anne is satisfied with regard to one particular: Captain Wentworth is acknowledged again by each.

Elizabeth is revolving a great measure. She gives her invitations “To-morrow evening, to meet a few friends; no formal party;” and puts down her cards with “Miss Elliot at home,” and a courteous, comprehensive smile for all, and one smile and one card decidedly for Captain Wentworth. Elizabeth has been long enough in Bath to understand the importance in society of a man of such an air and appearance. The cards given, Sir Walter and Elizabeth rise and disappear.

Captain Wentworth has received the card with no more than a polite acknowledgment. Anne cannot think that he will accept such an offering as an atonement for the insolence of the past. He holds the card in his hand as if considering.

“‘Only think of Elizabeth’s including everybody,’ whispers Mary audibly. ‘I do not wonder Captain Wentworth is delighted. He cannot put the card out of his hand.’”

Anne catches his eye, sees his cheeks glow and his mouth form itself into an expression of contempt, and turns away that she may see no more.

The party separates—Anne going with the ladies.[Pg 378] She is begged to return and dine, but her spirits have been too long exerted, she is only fit for home. She promises to be with her friends the whole of the following morning, and closes the fatigues of the day by a toilsome walk to Camden Place.

Anne rouses herself from the never-ending self-questioning, “Will Captain Wentworth come or not?” to let Mrs. Clay know she has been seen with Mr. Elliot three hours after his being supposed to have left Bath. It seems to Anne there is guilt in Mrs. Clay’s face, but the expression clears instantly. “Oh, dear! very true,” exclaims Mrs. Clay. “Only think, Miss Elliot, to my great surprise I met with Mr. Elliot in Bath Street. I was never more astonished. He turned back and walked with me to the Pump Yard. He had been prevented setting off for Thornbury. He wanted to know how early he might be admitted to-morrow. He was full of ‘to-morrow.’”

VIII.
One day only has passed since Anne’s conversation with Mrs. Smith, but a keener interest has intervened; she must still defer her visit to Lady Russell. She cannot keep her appointment punctually, however; she is detained by rain. When she reaches the “White Hart” she finds herself neither quite in time, nor the first to arrive.

“The party before her were Mrs. Musgrove talking to Mrs. Croft, and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth; and she immediately heard that Mary and Henrietta, too impatient to wait, had gone out the moment it had cleared, but would be back again soon, and that the strictest injunctions had been left with Mrs. Musgrove to keep her there till they returned. She had only to submit, and feel herself plunged at once in all the agitation of which she had merely laid her[Pg 379] account of tasting a little before the morning closed. There was no delay, no waste of time. She was deep in the happiness of such misery, or the misery of such happiness, instantly. Two minutes after her entering the room, Captain Wentworth said, ‘We will write the letter we were talking of, Harville, now, if you will give me materials.’

“Materials were all at hand on a separate table; he went to it, and merely turning his back on them all, was engrossed with writing.

“Mrs. Musgrove was giving Mrs. Croft the history of her eldest daughter’s engagement, and just in that inconvenient tone of voice which was perfectly audible, while it pretended to be in a whisper.” The mother finishes with the assertion, “At any rate,” said I, “it will be better than a long engagement.”

Mrs. Croft chimes in heartily. She would rather have young people settle on a small income at once, and struggle with a few difficulties together, than be involved in a long engagement.

“Oh, dear, Mrs. Croft,” cried Mrs. Musgrove, unable to let her finish her speech, “there is nothing I so abominate as a long engagement. It is what I always protested against for my children,” with more strong objections to the same effect from both ladies.

Anne found an unexpected interest here. She felt it in its application to herself—felt it in a nervous thrill all over her; and at the same moment that her eyes instinctively glanced towards the distant table, Captain Wentworth’s pen ceased to move, his head was raised, pausing, listening, and he turned round the next instant to give a look—one quick, conscious look—at her.

Captain Harville, who has been hearing nothing, invites Anne to join him. “The window at which he stood was at the other end of the room from where the two ladies were sitting, and though nearer to Captain Wentworth’s table, not very near. ‘Look here,’ said he, unfolding a parcel in his hand, and displaying a small miniature painting; ‘do you know who that is?’

[Pg 380]

“‘Certainly: Captain Benwick.’”

He tells her he has been commissioned to get the miniature, which was painted for his sister, re-set for Louisa Musgrove. Anne, while entering into his feelings, so far vindicates Captain Benwick, by asserting the superior fidelity of women. “Oh!” cried Captain Harville, in a tone of strong feeling, “if I could but make you comprehend what a man suffers when he takes a last look at his wife and children, and watches the boat that he has sent them off in as long as it is in sight, and then turns away and says, ‘God knows whether we shall ever meet again!’ And then, if I could convey to you the glow of his soul when he does see them again; when, coming back after a twelve-month’s absence, perhaps, and obliged to put into another port, he calculates how soon it may be possible to get them there, pretending to deceive himself, and saying, ‘They cannot be here till such a day,’ but all the while hoping for them twelve hours sooner, and seeing them arrive at last, as if Heaven had given them wings, by many hours sooner still.

“‘Oh!’ cried Anne, eagerly, ‘I hope I do justice to all that is felt by you, and by those who resemble you. God forbid that I should undervalue the warm and faithful feelings of any of my fellow-creatures! I should deserve utter contempt if I dared to suppose that true attachment and constancy were known only by women. No, I believe you capable of everything great and good in your married lives. I believe you equal to every important exertion, and to every domestic forbearance, so long as—if I may be allowed the expression—so long as you have an object: I mean while the woman you love lives, and lives for you. All the privilege I claim for my own sex (it is not a very enviable one, you need not covet it), is that of loving longest, when existence or when hope is gone.’

“She could not immediately have uttered another sentence; her heart was too full, her breath too much oppressed.

[Pg 381]

“‘You are a good soul!’ cried Captain Harville, putting his hand on her arm quite affectionately. ‘There is no quarrelling with you. And when I think of Benwick, my tongue is tied.’

“Their attention was called towards the others. Mrs. Croft was taking leave.

“‘Here, Frederick, you and I part company, I believe,’ said she. ‘I am going home, and you have an engagement with your friend. To-night we may have the pleasure of all meeting again at your party,’ turning to Anne. ‘We had your sister’s card yesterday, and I understood Frederick had a card, too, though I did not see it; and you are disengaged, Frederick, are you not, as well as ourselves?’

“Captain Wentworth was folding up a letter in great haste, and either could not, or would not, answer fully.

“‘Yes,’ said he, ‘very true. Here we separate; but Harville and I shall soon be after you, that is, Harville, if you are ready—I am, in half a minute. I know you will not be sorry to be off.’

“Mrs. Croft left them, and Captain Wentworth, having sealed his letter with great rapidity, was, indeed, ready, and had even a hurried, agitated air, which showed impatience to be gone. Anne knew not how to understand it. She had the kindest ‘Good morning! God bless you!’ from Captain Harville, but from him not a word nor a look! He had passed out of the room without a look!

“She had only time, however, to move closer to the table where he had been writing, when footsteps were heard entering; the door opened, it was himself. He begged their pardon, but he had forgotten his gloves; and instantly crossing the room to the writing-table, and standing with his back towards Mrs. Musgrove, he drew out a letter from under the scattered papers, placed it before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty fixed on her, and hastily collecting his gloves, was again out of the room, almost before Mrs. Musgrove was aware of his being in it; the work of an instant!

[Pg 382]

“The revolution which one instant had made in Anne was almost beyond expression. The letter, with a direction hardly legible, ‘To Miss A. E——’ was evidently the one which he had been folding so hastily. While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick he had been also addressing her! On the contents of that letter depended all which this world could do for her! Anything was possible, anything might be defied rather than suspense. Mrs. Musgrove had little arrangements of her own at her own table; to their protection she must trust, and sinking into the chair which he had occupied, succeeding to the very spot where he had leaned and written, her eyes devoured the following words:—

“‘I can listen no longer in silence. I must speak to you by such means as are within my reach. You pierce my soul. I am half agony, half hope. Tell me not that I am too late, that such precious feelings are gone for ever. I offer myself to you again, with a heart even more your own than when you almost broke it, eight years and a half ago. Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman, that his love has an earlier death! I have loved none but you. Unjust I may have been, weak and resentful I have been, but never inconstant. You alone have brought me to Bath. For you alone I think and plan. Have you not seen this? Can you fail to have understood my wishes? I had not waited even these ten days, could I have read your feelings as I think you must have penetrated mine. I can hardly write. I am every instant hearing something which overpowers me. You sink your voice, but I can distinguish the tones of that voice when they would be lost on others. Too good, too excellent creature! You do us justice, indeed. You do believe that there is true attachment and constancy among men. Believe it to be most permanent, most undeviating in F. W.

“‘I must go uncertain of my fate, but I shall return hither or follow your party as soon as possible. A word,[Pg 383] a look will be enough to decide whether I enter your father’s house this evening or never.’”[82]

Such a letter is not soon to be recovered from. Anne has to plead illness, and is forced to accept her brother-in-law’s escort home.

“They were in Union Street, when a quicker step behind, a something of familiar sound, gave her two moments’ preparation for the sight of Captain Wentworth. He joined them, but as if irresolute whether to join or pass on, said nothing, only looked. Anne could command herself enough to receive that look and not repulsively. The cheeks which had been pale now glowed, and the movements which had hesitated were decided. He walked by her side. Presently, struck by a sudden thought, Charles said—

“‘Captain Wentworth, which way are you going? Only to Gay Street, or farther up the town?’

“‘I hardly know,’ replied Captain Wentworth, surprised.

“‘Are you going as high as Belmont? Are you going near Camden Place? Because if you are, I shall have no scruple in asking you to take my place, and give Anne your arm to her father’s door. She is rather done for this morning, and must not go so far without help, and I ought to be at that fellow’s in the Market Place. He promised me the sight of a capital gun he is just going to send off; said he would keep it unpacked to the last possible moment, that I might see it; and if I do not turn back now, I have no chance. By his description it is a good deal like the second-sized[Pg 384] double-barrel of mine which you shot with one day round Winthrop.’[83]

“There could be no objection. There could only be a most proper alacrity, a most obliging compliance for public view; and smiles reined in and spirits dancing in private rapture. In half a minute Charles was at the bottom of Union Street again, and the other two proceeding together; and soon words enough had passed between them to decide their direction towards the comparatively quiet and retired gravel walk, where the power of conversation would make the present hour a blessing indeed, and prepare it for all the immortality which the happiest recollections of their own future life could bestow. There they exchanged again those feelings and those promises which had once before seemed to secure everything, but which had been followed by so many, many years of division and estrangement. There they returned again into the past, more exquisitely happy, perhaps, in their re-union than when it had been first projected; more tender, more tried, more fixed in a knowledge of each other’s character, truth, and attachment; more equal to act, more justified in acting. And there, as they slowly paced the gradual ascent, heedless of every group around them, all the little variations of the last week were gone through, and of yesterday and to-day there could scarcely be an end.

“At last Anne was at home again, happier than any one in that house could have conceived.

“The evening came, the drawing-rooms were lighted up, the company assembled. It was but a card party;[Pg 385] it was but a mixture of those who had never met before, and those who had met too often; a commonplace business, too numerous for intimacy, too small for variety; but Anne had never found an evening shorter. Glowing and lovely in sensibility and happiness, and more generally admired than she thought about or cared for, she had cheerful or forbearing feelings for every creature around her; with Captain Wentworth some moments of communication constantly occurring and always the hope of more, and always the knowledge of his being there.

“It was in one of these short meetings, each apparently occupied in admiring a fine display of green-house plants, that she told him, with that candour and fairness to herself and everybody which no passion, and no submission to his influence could warp:

“‘I have been thinking over the past, and I must believe that I am right, much as I suffered from it, in being guided by the friend who to me was in the place of a parent. Do not mistake me, however. I am not saying she did not err in her advice. I mean I was right in submitting to it; and if I mistake not, a strong sense of duty is no bad part of a woman’s portion.’[84]

“He looked at her, looked at Lady Russell, and looking again at her, replied as if in cool deliberation, ‘Not yet. But there are hopes of her being forgiven in time. But I, too, have been thinking over the past, and a question has suggested itself, whether there may not have been one person more my enemy even than that lady. My own self. Tell me, if when I returned to England in the year ’eight, with a few thousand pounds,[85] and was posted into the Laconia, if I had then written to you, would you have answered my letter? Would you, in short, have renewed the engagement then?’

“‘Would I?’ was all her answer; but the accent was decisive.

[Pg 386]

“‘Good God!’ he cried, ‘you would! It is not that I did not think of it, or desire it, as what could alone crown all my other success; but I was proud, too proud to ask again. I did not understand you. Six years of separation and suffering might have been spared. I have been used to the gratification of believing myself to earn every blessing that I enjoyed. I have valued myself on honourable toils and just rewards. Like other great men under reverses,’ he added, with a smile, ‘I must learn to brook being happier than I deserve.’”

“Who can doubt what followed?” Jane Austen begins the last chapter. Sir Walter made no objection, and Elizabeth did nothing worse than look cold and unconcerned. Captain Wentworth, with five-and-twenty thousand pounds, and as high in his profession as merit and activity could place him, was no longer a nobody.

Among other results of the marriage, Lady Russell learnt to like the man who made Anne Elliot happy. Captain Wentworth became the cordial and helpful friend of Mrs. Smith. Mr. Elliot, who had been playing a deep game, withdrew from Bath, and caused Mrs. Clay to withdraw also. She gave up Sir Walter, for the sake of his heir. It remained doubtful whether her cunning was not more than a match for his, and whether, in losing the chance of becoming the wife of Sir Walter, she might not wheedle the future Sir William into raising her into the position of Lady Elliot.

It would be impertinent to add a word of praise to a novel which—while it is often as penetrating and unerring in discussing the motives, and as richly humorous in dealing with the absurdities and follies of human nature as “Pride and Prejudice” and “Northanger Abbey”—has a gentle grace and a pathetic feeling all its own, so far as Jane Austen’s novels are concerned. The last warm words of praise to the gallant profession to which two of her brothers belonged, is another testimony to her keen family sympathies, as well as to her quick, womanly response to all that was patriotic and heroic.

FOOTNOTES:
[70]Written in 1816, and published after the Author’s death.

[71]If Jane Austen’s high standing as an artist is granted, what becomes of the heathen saying that “Art has no moral?” Was she simply great in spite of her morals? Again, how shall we dispose of the scornful criticism, which treats the details of domestic life in a novel as twaddle? Jane Austen and twaddle are as far apart as Jane Austen and bombast.

[72]A young Musgrove who had been in the navy, and died abroad.

[73]Anne Elliot’s pathetic position is unique, so far as I know, in the literature of Jane Austen’s day. The contrast of her faded face and subdued spirit with Henrietta and Louisa Musgrove’s fresh bloom and unchecked joyousness, would not be attempted in our day, with the same object in view, by an author who put a supreme value on material advantages, and extolled the attractions of youth beyond all other attractions. No such author—above all in a semi-cynical, semi-sensuous generation—could have anticipated, far less projected, the end of “Persuasion.”

[74]In those days no lady was to be found without her small bottle of “smelling salts” or her vinaigrette with aromatic vinegar. Have we fewer headaches now-a-days, or are we more patient in bearing them?

[75]The manner in which the set-aside, quiet woman, who has yet so much more strength and power of resource than the others, comes to the front, whether she will or no, in the moment of trouble, is fine and true to nature.

[76]The perfect simplicity, unaffectedness, and absence of self-consciousness—including any consciousness of merit, displayed in Anne’s kindness to her former companion, is very refreshing, after those ostentatious representations of doing good, and of making private stock out of public benevolence, which we are constantly encountering both in real life and in books.

[77]The sudden bestowal of Louisa Musgrove and Captain Benwick on each other is one of the most genuine and delightful surprises of fiction. It is not only a triumphant testimony to how the whole destiny, not merely of one person, but of a group of persons, may be altered by what seems the simplest accident—the turning of a straw; it is one of those bits of warm, homely, human inconsistency which baffle all anticipation, are worth a hundred bloodless, laboured, logical sequences, but can only be fitly conceived and carried out in a story, by a great artist.

[78]A hint of defence for what might have been his own case.

[79]A familiarity with Italian used to be considered the graceful crown of a woman’s accomplishments.

[80]The “rattle” of Madame D’Arblay’s novel of “Cecilia.”

[81]The two capital chapters, of which the substance is now to be given, were written by Jane Austen to supersede a cancelled chapter in “Persuasion,” withdrawn after she had finished the story.

[82]The renewal of the good understanding between Anne and Captain Wentworth was contrived in the cancelled chapter of the story, with much less spirit and feeling—as Jane Austen herself judged rightly—by an accidental interview between the lovers in the Crofts’ lodgings; in the course of which Admiral Croft unsuspiciously imposes on his brother-in-law the trying task of conveying to Anne, Admiral and Mrs. Croft’s friendly desire not to stand in the way of the arrangements of Mr. Elliot and his cousin on their marriage; on the contrary, the Crofts offer to vacate Kellynch to them if they wish it.

[83]In the intense sense of reality which all Jane Austen’s stories give us, we are prompted here to go beyond what the author has chosen to tell us, and speculate how the Musgroves, great and small, received the news—not merely of Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot’s engagement, but what they were sure to hear also, sooner or later, that it was the end of an old attachment, utterly unsuspected by all their friends at Uppercross. Would the Musgroves in their good nature content themselves with thinking the couple had kept their secret well, or would there be a general, slightly indignant sense of having been taken in and humbugged, like, in its degree, to that which Emma Woodhouse experienced when she learnt the long-standing engagement between Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax?

[84]No, indeed, it is her chief treasure.

[85]These were the very different days of frequent naval engagements and much prize money.

Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co., Belle Sauvage Works, London, E.C.

Transcriber’s Notes
Punctuation errors have been fixed.

Page 179: “not seen to create” changed to “not seem to create”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JANE AUSTEN AND HER WORKS ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gloria
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Gloria
A novel

Author: Emma Dorothy Eliza Nevitte Southworth

Release date: May 20, 2023 [eBook #70811]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: A. L. Burt Company, 1877

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLORIA ***
GLORIA
A Novel
By MRS. E. D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH
Author of
“The Unloved Wife,” “Lilith,” “Em,” “Em’s Husband,”
“For Whose Sake,” “Why Did He Wed Her?”
“The Bride’s Ordeal,” “Her Love or Her Life,” Etc.
logo
A. L. BURT COMPANY
PUBLISHERS :: :: NEW YORK
Popular Books
By MRS. E. D. E. N. SOUTHWORTH
In Handsome Cloth Binding
Price 60 Cents per Volume
CAPITOLA’S PERIL
CRUEL AS THE GRAVE
“EM”
EM’S HUSBAND
FOR WHOSE SAKE
ISHMAEL
LILITH
THE BRIDE’S FATE
THE CHANGED BRIDES
THE HIDDEN HAND
THE UNLOVED WIFE
TRIED FOR HER LIFE
SELF-RAISED
WHY DID HE WED HER
GLORIA
DAVID LINDSAY
For Sale by all Booksellers or will be sent postpaid on receipt of price
A. L. BURT COMPANY PUBLISHERS
52 Duane Street New York
Copyright, 1877 and 1891
By ROBERT BONNER’S SONS
Renewal granted to Mrs. Charlotte Southworth Lawrence, 1905
“GLORIA”
Printed by special arrangement with
STREET & SMITH
GLORIA
3
CHAPTER I
A SPOILED BEAUTY
Her eyes flashed fire! Convulsive rage possessed
Her trembling limbs and heaved her laboring breast;
Blind to the future, by this rage misled,
She pulled down ruin on her reckless head.
Dryden.
“David Lindsay, will you marry me?”

The speaker was a girl scarcely past childhood, young, beautiful, good, wealthy, and yet—desperate, as not only her words, but her every look, tone, and gesture proved.

Her voice was low, her tone steadied by a powerful self-control. She stood there with a pale horror, yet fixed resolution, on her face; as one might stand on the deck of a burning ship, wrought up to choose death between fire and water, ready to escape the flames by plunging into the sea.

He to whom she spoke was a poor fisherman on the estate, young, strong, healthy and handsome, with the good looks that youth and health give, but bronzed by exposure, roughened by toil and rudely clothed.

4The scene of this strange interview was a small, sandy island on the coast of Maryland. The time, an overclouded and blustering morning near the end of January.

He had been hard at work mending his boat, which lay bottom upwards on the beach, when she came suddenly upon him.

Then he stood up, took off his old tarpaulin hat, and respectfully waited her orders.

What a contrast they formed, as they stood there facing each other—she, the delicate, patrician beauty, wrapped in richest furs and finest velvets, yet with that look of pale horror and fixed resolution on her beautiful face—he, the hardy son of the soil, bronzed and rugged, clothed in a rough pea-jacket and loose corduroy trowsers, with their legs tucked into high, coarse, bull-hide boots; robust, erect, cordial, yet with a look of unbounded astonishment in his fine dark eyes.

They might have been the last young man and maiden left in the world, for all sign of human life or habitation near them, as they stood on that little sterile isle—around them the dark-gray sea roughened by a high wind—behind them the mainland in its wintry aspect of skeleton forests, rising from snow-clad hills.

“David Lindsay, will you marry me?” repeated the girl, seeing that he had not answered her question, but stood before her dumfounded with amazement.

“Miss de la Vera!” was all that he could utter, even now.

“I know that you love me,” she continued, speaking now with more vehemence, and looking over her shoulder, from moment to moment, as if, even 5in that remote, sea-girt isle, she dreaded espionage, eavesdroppers, discovery, pursuit, arrest. “I know that you love me, David! It is that which gives me courage to come to you for refuge in my dreadful desperation. I know that you love me, for I heard you say so once—when you saved my life that time at the imminent risk of your own.”

“And, oh, is it possible that you can love me?” breathed the young man, in deep tones vibrating with his heart’s profound emotions; for with his whole heart he had loved her, deeply, ardently, hopelessly—with his whole soul he had worshiped her, afar off, as some exalted and forever unattainable good. “Is it possible that you can love me?”

“No!” she answered, hurriedly. “I do not love you! That is, I mean I love everybody, and you more than others; but oh, David, feeling sure that you love me, for you told me so once——”

“I was mad in my presumptuous folly——” began the youth.

“Feeling sure that you love me, because you told me so once, although I do not love you yet more than others, I will be your wife and try to love you more, if only you will take me far away from this place at once and forever, David! If you ever cared for me, stop to ask no questions; but do as I ask you, and you shall have my hand and all that I possess!” she breathed hardly, looking over her shoulder at intervals, with a nervous, expectant, terrified manner.

“Miss de la Vera, it is you who are mad now!” he replied, in a tone of ineffable sadness and longing, as he gazed on her with something like consternation.

6And well he might! The situation was astounding!

Here was this young girl, Gloria de la Vera, the daintiest beauty, the wealthiest heiress in the country, proposing to marry HIM, the poor young fisherman attached to the estate! It was wonderful, unprecedented, incredible!

Why, half the young men in the community were mad to get her. A smile of hers would have brought the best of them to her feet.

And yet she came to give her hand and her fortune to this poor, unlearned young fisherman!

“Nothing, nothing but temporary insanity could have betrayed her into such a reckless proposal,” said the young fisherman to himself.

Yet the girl who stood there before him, calm, pale, and steadfast as a marble statue, was not insane—no, nor immodest, nor unmaidenly, however appearances might tell against her.

Neither had she done any wrong, or even suffered any wrong; for she had scarcely a fault in her nature to lead her into any evil, and never an enemy in the world to do her any injury.

Nor had she quarreled with a betrothed lover and sought to revenge herself upon him by rushing into this low marriage; but she had never been in love and never been engaged.

Neither did she hurry towards matrimony as a refuge from domestic despotism, for she was the petted darling of a widowed and childless uncle, who had been a father to her orphanage; and she had had her own right royal will and way all her little life.

If there were any despotic tyrant at old Promontory Hall, that tyrant was the dainty little beauty, 7Gloria de la Vera herself, and if there were any “down-trodden” slave, that victim was the renowned military hero, Colonel Marcellus de Crespigney!

Why, then, since no reasonable, nor even unreasonable motive could be found for the mad act, should Gloria de la Vera wish to hurl herself head-long down into the deep perdition of a low and loveless marriage?

To elucidate the mystery we must narrate the incidents of her short life.

On the coast of Maryland there is a bleak head of land thrown out into the sea, and united to the main only by a long and narrow neck of rocks.

If this weird headland had been a little loftier it would have been a promontory—or if the neck of rocks had been a little lower it would have been an island.

As it happened, it was neither, or it was both; for, at low tide, when the neck was bare, the head was a promontory, and at high tide, when the waves rolled over the rocks, it was an island entirely surrounded by the sea.

The ground arose gradually from the shore to the centre, upon the highest and safest part of which stood a large, square, heavy, gray stone building, in a yard inclosed by a high stone wall.

Lower down on the shore was another wall, called the sea-wall.

Beyond this, on the sand, were a few scattered fishing huts and boat-sheds.

There was but little vegetation on the place, and the nearer the shore the sparser the growth. On the hill near the house, indeed, there were a few old oaks, said to have been planted more than two 8centuries before by the first owners of the soil and builders of the house. There were also a few gigantic horse-chestnuts and other fine forest trees; but all these had been transplanted from the mainland ages before. There was nothing of native growth on the promontory.

Behind the house was an old garden, where “made soil” was so rich that the place had grown into a perfect thicket of shrubs, vines, creepers, bushes, and all sorts of hardy old plants, flowers, and fruit-trees.

Behind this was a kitchen garden, where a few vegetables were with difficulty raised for the use of the family, and beyond were fields of thinly growing grass and grain, that barely afforded sustenance for the cattle and sheep on the premises.

Altogether this half sterile promontory, with its square, massive gray stone mansion, its high stone yard-wall, its strong stone sea-wall, its iron gates, and its grim aspect, looked more like a fortress or a prison than the hereditary home of a private family.

The locality had also a bad reputation, and a worse tradition, besides as many aliases as any professional burglar.

It was called Pirates’ Point, Buccaneers’ Bridge, and La Compte’s Landing.

The story, or the history, was that this place had been the frequent resort of the notorious freebooter, La Compte, whose nom-de-guerre of “Blackbeard” had been, in the old colonial days, the terror of the Chesapeake and its tributaries.

Vast treasure, it was said, had once been buried 9here, and might still be waiting its resurrection at the hands of some fortunate finder.

However that might have been, whatever wealth of gold, silver, or precious stones might have lain hidden for ages in the depths of that sterile ground, it is certain that the last proprietor of the promontory was poor enough.

He was Marcellus de Crespigney, a retired officer of the army, an impoverished gentleman.

At the time our story opens, Colonel Crespigney was a young widower, without children and without family, if we except his maiden aunt, Miss Agrippina de Crespigney, and his youthful ward, Gloria de la Vera.

His history may be very briefly summed up. He was the second son of a wealthy Louisiana planter, whose estate being entailed upon the eldest male child, left little or nothing to younger brothers or sisters.

Marcellus, when required to select a profession, being of a grave and studious disposition, would have preferred divinity or medicine, but finally yielded to the wish of his father, and entered West Point Military Academy to be educated for the army.

At the age of twenty-one he graduated with honors, and then went to spend a short leave with his parents previous to joining his regiment.

He met them by appointment at Saratoga, which was at that time the headquarters and great summer resort of Southern families, flying from the fierce heat and fatal fevers of their native districts to the cool breezes and healing waters of the North.

And here, Marcellus, or, as he was most frequently called, Marcel de Crespigney, met the great 10misfortune of his life, for here he first saw the lady who was destined to be his wife.

Marcel de Crespigney was one of the handsomest men of his time. At the age of twenty-one he was as beautiful as Apollo. His form was of medium size and fair proportions, his head stately and well set, his features Romanesque in their regularity and delicacy of outline; his hair and beard were dark brown, and closely curled; his eyes dark hazel, with a steady, thoughtful, sympathetic gaze that had the effect of mesmerizing any one upon whom it fell.

Such beauty is too often an evil and a cause of weakness in man. It frequently inspires and nourishes vanity, and saps and blights true manliness.

Such, however, was not its effect upon Marcel de Crespigney.

He had his fatal weakness, as you will presently discover; but that weakness did not take its root in self-love—quite the contrary.

If he had possessed vanity, however, he would have found a surfeit of food for it.

Wherever he appeared, he was noticed as the handsomest man in the company, and many were the light-headed and soft-hearted girls who fell more or less in love with him.

At Saratoga, in the immediate circle of his mother and sisters, he met a party of West Indians—the Count Antonia de la Vera, an aged Portuguese grandee, his young wife, the Countess Eleanor, her sister, Eusebie La Compte, and their three-year-old daughter, named after the good Queen of Portugal, Maria da Gloria; but for the radiant beauty of her fair complexion, golden hair, 11and sapphire eyes, which she inherited from her mother, they called her Gloria only.

Of all the people present, this child took suddenly and solely to the young lieutenant. She would leave father, mother, auntie or nurse, to leap into the arms of her “Own Marcel,” as she soon learned to call him. It was wonderful; and superficial people said it was his gay uniform that attracted the child—but then the child looked only at his eyes!

But there was another of the West Indian party who found great pleasure in the presence of Marcel de Crespigney. This was Miss Eusebie La Compte, the sister of the Señora Eleanor.

They, the sisters, were not West Indians, but Marylanders, orphan daughters and co-heiresses of old George La Compte, of La Compte’s Landing and Pirates’ Promontory.

In the division of the estate after the death of their parents, the most valuable portion, La Compte’s Landing, had been given to the eldest daughter, Eleanor, and the least desirable, Promontory Hall, to the youngest, Eusebie.

It was while the sisters were residing at the house of their guardian, an eminent lawyer of Washington city, that they made the acquaintance of the Count de la Vera, then ambassador from Portugal. He was a bachelor, and attracted by the radiant blonde beauty of the elder sister, he had proposed for her hand.

Eleanor, whose heart was free, and whose fancy was fascinated by the prospect of rank, wealth and position, promptly accepted the offer, and in due time became Madame de la Vera.

12A brilliant season in Washington followed their marriage, then a tour of the fashionable watering-places.

Finally, when the ambassador was recalled, he went to Lisbon to resign his portfolio, and then he came back and settled down on his West Indian estates.

But not for long.

Troubles broke out. Possessions were insecure.

Count de la Vera sold off his property and came to Maryland, the native State of his beautiful wife, where he invested largely in land.

By this time the Señora Eleanor’s health began to fail. Then her doting husband sent for her sister to travel with her, and to help to relieve her of the care of their infant daughter, Gloria.

They all went to Saratoga together, and thus it happened that we found them in the company of Madame de Crespigney and her daughters.

Eusebie La Compte, the heiress of the bleak promontory, had not the radiant beauty of her sister, whose brilliant complexion, shining golden hair and sparkling blue eyes had been inherited by her daughter; no, the pale face, sandy locks and gray eyes of Eusebie formed but a tame copy of the brighter picture.

Yet Eusebie could not be called “plain,” and far less “ugly.” Her form seemed cast in the same mold as that of her beautiful elder sister, only it was thinner. Her profile had the same classic facial angle, but it was sharper. Her complexion was quite as fair, only it was paler. Her hair was of the same color, only it was duller. Her eyes were of the same hue, but they were dimmer.

13If Eusebie had been healthy and happy, she would have been as beautiful and brilliant as her sister; or if she had been smitten, as Eleanor had, by hectic fever only, which gives color to the cheeks and light to the eye. But to be afflicted with malaria, which dulls the complexion and dims the eyes, is quite another thing.

Nevertheless, there were times when Eusebie was almost beautiful. It was when any strong emotion flushed her cheeks and fired her eyes.

The West Indian party did not go much into society. The health of Señora Eleanor forbade their doing so. The only company they saw was our party from Louisiana.

The illness of the mother and the negligence of the nurse, threw the little Gloria very much upon the care of Eusebie, who was almost always to be found in Madame de Crespigney’s circle.

Thus it happened that Eusebie and Marcel were brought daily together, and united by their common interest in the beautiful child, Gloria.

So Eusebie, the pale, agueish girl, fell in love with the handsome young Marcel—fell in love with him, not after the manner of the soft-hearted girl, who sighed in secret and slipped out of sight, but after the manner of the woman who says to herself, “Love or death,” and thinks towards her victim, “Your love or your life!”

Marcel de Crespigney being of a tender, affectionate, sympathetic nature, had been more or less in love all the days of his youth. In earliest infancy he was ardently in love with his nurse. At five years old he was passionately enamored of his nursery governess, a bright young Yankee girl. 14And when she married the Methodist minister, Marcel wept tears of agony. His Sunday-school teacher, an amiable old maid, was his next flame. When she died of yellow fever he put crape on his little cap and flowers on her grave.

Then followed, as queens of his soul—his sisters’ music mistress, his mother’s seamstress, and the overseer’s sister-in-law. At the age of fifteen he actually offered marriage to the doctor’s widow, a genial, soft-eyed, warm-hearted matron of thirty-five, who, in her wisdom and goodness, refrained from wounding his affection by contempt, but gravely and kindly assured him that, though she declined to be engaged then, yet she would wait for him, and if he should be in the same mind five years from that time, she would listen to him.

The boy left her, in ecstasies of hope and happiness, after vows of unchanging, eternal fidelity.

But he did not remain in the same mind, which was fortunate, as the doctor’s widow also died, and—of yellow fever.

At the age of seventeen, when the young man entered West Point, as we have said, he would have speedily contracted a pure, platonic love for the colonel’s wife, a handsome and intellectual lady of middle age, only a high sense of honor warned him of the danger of such moral quicksands.

After this the boy devoted himself to his military studies, and the sentiment of spoonyism soon gave place to the sentiment of heroism.

Yes, Marcel de Crespigney had been in love nearly all his life; but he was neither vain enough nor observant enough to perceive the preference bestowed on him by his young lady friends; nor would he ever have known the infatuation of Eusebie La 15Compte, had not his mother discovered and revealed it to him.

In the eyes of Madame de Crespigney, the pale Eusebie seemed a very eligible match for her portionless son. Report had exaggerated the riches of the co-heiresses. The elder sister had married a Portuguese grandee. Altogether the connection seemed a good one in a social and financial point of view.

Of course, Madame de Crespigney did not set the matter before her son in that light. She knew Marcel too well. She adroitly directed his attention to the delicate girl, and enlisted his sympathies for her, so that he soon perceived how the pale cheeks would flush, and the dim eyes fire, and the whole plain face grow radiant and beautiful in the love-light of his presence. His heart was free, and so he became interested in her. He thought she was the first who had ever loved him, and so he grew to believe that he loved her.

At least he proposed to her and was accepted.

As the young officer had but a month’s leave before joining his regiment, that was under orders to march for Mexico to join General Scott’s army on the first of September, and as the bride-elect decided to accompany her intended husband, “even to the battlefield,” the engagement was a short one. The wedding was hurried.

On the morning of the twenty-fifth of August the young couple were quietly married in the nearest church, and immediately after the ceremony they set out for Washington, where Lieutenant de Crespigney joined his regiment, which was on the eve of departure for the seat of war.

I do not mean here to tell over again, even the 16least part, the oft-repeated story of the Mexican War, but only to allude in the briefest manner to Marcel de Crespigney’s share in it. He went to Mexico, accompanied by his bride, who was with him wherever duty called.

She spent the first three years of her married life in camps, on battle-fields, and in hospitals, and so did her woman’s share of the work.

He behaved gallantly from first to last, as is best shown by his military record. For, having entered the service at the beginning of the war with the rank of second lieutenant of cavalry, he left it at the close with that of colonel and brevet brigadier-general.

At the earliest solicitation of his wife, he then resigned his commission and retired with her to private life, on her estate at Pirates’ Promontory, the principal wealth of which consisted in its great fisheries.

No children had come to them to crown their union, and this want had been a source of disappointment to the husband and humiliation to the wife, that even threatened in the course of time to estrange them from each other.

They must have continued to live a very lonely life on their remote estate—“the world forgetting, by the world forgot”—but for circumstances that occurred in the first year of their residence at the Promontory.

These were the deaths of the aged Count de la Vera and his fragile young wife, who passed away within a few days of each other, leaving their orphan child, Maria de Gloria, to the care of her maternal aunt and uncle, who gladly received her.

17
CHAPTER II
MARIA GLORIA DE LA VERA
A willful elf, an uncle’s child,
And half a pet and half a pest,
By turns angelic, wicked, wild,
Made chaos of the household nest.
Anon.
Gloria was seven years old when she came to live with her uncle and aunt. She was too young and too bright to realize the loss she had sustained in the death of her parents, or to grieve long after them. And besides—was it a new affection, or was it a reminiscence of the old one? She soon became devotedly attached to her uncle.

It was a grim home to which the radiant child had been brought; but nothing could dim the brightness of her spirit or depress the gladness of her heart—not old Promontory Hall with its gray, massive, prison-like structure, its high stone walls, and its dreary sea view, drearier than usual in the dull December days in which Gloria looked upon it—not even the deadening coldness that was creeping like a blighting frost between the husband and the wife—a coldness that the warm-hearted child felt rather than understood.

This condition, it must be confessed, was the fault of Eusebie rather than Marcel. It grew out of the jealousy and suspicion that had their root in her inordinate and exacting affection for him.

Her self-tormenting spirit whispered that he had never really loved her, but had married her out of 18compassion, or, worse still, that he had never even cared for her in any manner, but had taken her for her little fortune alone. She saw that, as the years passed away, and hope of a family died out, he was disappointed in the continued absence of children, and she persuaded herself that he secretly hated and despised her for not giving them to him.

All this wore out her health and spirits.

And so she grew more and more irritable and petulant, often repelling his best-meant efforts to comfort and cheer her—telling him she wanted none of his capricious sympathy, his hypocritical tenderness; she could live without either.

All this he bore with the greater patience because he knew it could not last long—because he saw the fiery soul was burning out the fragile body, and because he felt that there was a grain of truth in the stack of falsehood. It was this—that he had married her for pity, or for such love as pity inspires.

The coming of Gloria into this house of discord had been as the advent of an angel in purgatory. Her very presence had a mediating, reconciling power.

Yet it must not be supposed that Gloria was a real angel, or that her coming brought perfect peace to the household. Far from this. Gloria had a fiery little spirit of her own that sometimes flamed out at very inconvenient times and seasons, and the most she did towards restoring harmony was to restrain by her bright presence the expression of harsh feelings, and to prevent the estrangement breaking out into open warfare.

While they would be sitting silent and sullen, at the same fireside, in the long back parlor that 19looked out upon the leaden sky and sea of these dull December days, he would be apparently absorbed in the perusal of some favorite old classic author, she would be engaged in knitting, the glittering, fine, long needles glancing in and out between her delicate white fingers, in round after round of stitches—for she was a great knitter of lamb’s-wool hose—the child would be sitting on the carpet somewhere near, earnestly employed in dressing her doll, drawing on her slate, or cutting figures out of paper—but always singing some little song to herself, filling the room with harmony.

How could the sullen couple break into open warfare in her presence?

Yet sometimes they did so. A dispute would arise out of that dull silence, as a breeze would spring over the gray sea, and blow into storm in one case as in the other.

The gust always arose from Eusebie’s quarter. And Marcel always got the worst of it.

Often little Gloria would see him grieved, humiliated, yet silent and patient, under his wife’s false accusations and bitter reproaches.

Then her soul would be filled with sympathy, her song would cease, her playthings drop, and she would get up and take her little stool and go and sit down by his side and slip her small hand into his and lay her bright head on his knee.

This always quelled the rising storm. It prevented Marcel from retorting, however much exasperated he might be, and it eventually silenced Eusebie, for no one can keep up a quarrel alone.

Gloria’s interference did not always stop at sympathy for Marcel. It sometimes, indeed, broke out into righteous indignation against Eusebie.

20On one occasion, she had heard her unhappy aunt taunt him with his want of fortune and charge him with mercenary motives in marrying her. She had seen her uncle’s dark cheek flame, and had noticed how hard it was for him to keep his temper; and she had left her play and gone and sat down by his side, and put her little arms around his knee and laid her shining head upon it.

That had soothed and silenced him. He could not give way to his evil spirit in the presence of the child.

But, mind, when at length he arose and left the parlor, and Gloria found herself alone with her aunt, she rebuked that passionate woman fearlessly.

“You treat my uncle worse than you would dare to treat any negro slave on the promontory,” she exclaimed, in angry tears.

“He is not your uncle,” was all the lady said in reply.

“He is your husband, then! And you treat him worse than you would dare to treat any one else in the world, just because he is a gentleman and cannot retort upon you. You just dare to talk to old ’Phia as you talk to him, and she would give you such a tongue-lashing as you would not get over in a month.”

“If you do not cease your impertinence at once, Miss, I will give you such a whip-lashing as you won’t get over in six!” exclaimed the angry woman.

“No you will not, auntie! If you were to lay a whip upon me, only once, you would repent it all your life, and you would never have a chance to do it again. You are my auntie; but my uncle is my guardian, and he would lead me out of this 21house and we would never return to it. You know that!”

“Oh, Heaven! It is too true, for he loves me not at all!” breathed the poor woman, losing all self-command, and utterly breaking down in humiliation.

In a moment the child was at her side—at her feet.

“Oh, auntie, poor auntie, don’t cry! I have been naughty, very naughty! And I am sorry, very sorry! Indeed you may strike me now, if you want to, for I do deserve it now!” she said, trying with all her heart to soothe the weeping woman.

But Eusebie clasped the child to her bosom and burst into a passion of sobs and tears.

“I love you, auntie, dear. I do love you, and I am so sorry I was so naughty,” said the child, clasping the unhappy creature around the neck and lavishing caresses on her.

But Eusebie only sobbed the harder for all this.

“And uncle loves you, auntie, dear, indeed he does, although you do always tell him that he doesn’t care for you. I know he does, for when you are”—the child was about to say “cross,” but checked herself in time, and continued—“when you are unhappy he looks at you so pitifully.”

“Oh, Gloria, you don’t know anything about it, and I don’t want his pity. I am not a dog or a beggar,” exclaimed Eusebie, bitterly, as she put her niece from her lap and hurried from the parlor to her own room, to give unrestrained way to her grief.

This heart-sick and brain-sick poor woman was the plague and curse of the household, and such scenes as these were of frequent occurrence.

22Little Gloria acted always as a peacemaker, and always successfully; only once in a long time did her sense of justice rouse her indignation to the height of upbraiding her “auntie,” and then her quick bursts of temper were followed by as quick repentance and reparation. She was very impulsive—

“A being of sudden smiles and tears.”
This swift impulsiveness, with its sudden action and reaction, was the keynote to her whole character, the “kismet” of her life.

As yet she was the peacemaker of the house, and all within it felt that this had been her mission to the household. Even the old family servants put their heads together confidentially, or shook them wisely, while they whispered:

“Whatever de trouble is atween de two, marster and mist’ess done been parted long a merry ago if it hadn’t been for little Glo’.”

Indeed, this Promontory Hall, with its high, enclosing walls, and the gray sea rolling around it, and the estranged, unhappy pair within it, must have been a very dull, dreary and depressing home for any child who had not, like Gloria, an ever springing fountain of gladness in her own soul.

As soon as the long winter was over, and the sun shone warm and bright, and the earth grew green and the sea blue, Gloria was out and abroad, with the earliest birds and flowers, as bright as the brightest, and as glad as the gladdest.

With the revival of all nature there was a great revival of business also in the fisheries appertaining to the Promontory and its neighboring isles. 23The place that was so solitary all the winter was now all alive with fishermen, whose huts and tents and sheds dotted all the little islands within sight from the promontory. No fishermen except those in the service of the family were allowed to haul the seines, or even cast a net from the home beach.

Among the fishermen attached to the service of the family was a young lad of about twelve years old. His parents had passed away, leaving him in the care of his grandmother, who lived in a tiny, sandy islet that stood alone, half a mile east of the promontory.

Who had been the original owner of the little sandhill no one ever knew; for the property was not of sufficient value to stimulate inquiries; and, besides, it had been for ages past occupied by a family of squatters, the present representatives of whom were David Lindsay and his grandmother.

It was on a brilliant May morning that the little Gloria, in her wanderings about the promontory, came to a broken part of the old sea-wall, and, instigated by curiosity, clambered over the stones and looked out upon a long stretch of sands upon which sheds, huts, and stranded boats were scattered among nets, seines, sea-weed and driftwood.

The child, standing in the breach of the wall, paused to gaze with interest on the rude scene that was so entirely new to her.

Then she saw a boy seated amid a drift of nets and seines, with a reel of coarse twine and a large wooden needle in his hand, busy with some work that quite absorbed his attention; for he neither saw nor heard the approach of the little girl.

She, on her part, stood still and watched him with surprise and delight.

24The solitary child had not seen another child of any sort, white or black, girl or boy, for more than a year. She had lived only with grown-up people, and very “scroobious” and depressing grown-up people at that. Now her heart leaped for joy at the sight of an angel from her own heaven—another child!

What if he was a poor little lad, with a torn straw hat set on his tangled black curls, a sunburned face, a patched coat, trowsers rolled up to his knees, and below them naked legs and feet? He was another child—an angel from her own heaven! He had come with the sun and the spring, with the birds and the flowers. Here was the crowning joy of the season indeed.

He would be her playmate. He would not rail and weep like Eusebie, nor sigh and groan like Marcel. He would be glad like herself.

Without an instant’s hesitation she ran down to him.

Children, when left to their own intuition, are the most simple and natural democrats and republicans. They care nothing and know nothing of caste. When misled by others, they may become the most repulsive little aristocrats alive.

She stood before him breathless, smiling.

As for the boy, he looked up at her in pleased surprise at the brightest vision that had ever gladdened his eyes.

“Little boy!” she exclaimed, in a tone of kindly greeting.

“Yes, little girl,” he answered, as he arose, dropping his nets and taking off his torn hat.

“I’m so glad to see you!” she exclaimed, smiling.

“So am I, you. Will you sit down on the boat? 25It is quite dry,” he said, as he pointed to the upturned skiff upon which he himself had been seated.

“Oh, yes, I thank you. I would like to sit down because I have been walking all over the promontory and I am so tired,” she said, as she seated herself.

“Put your feet on this stone, the sands are damp,” said the lad, as he placed a flat piece of rock near her.

“Yes; I thank you. And you sit down, too. Don’t you stand,” she continued. He obeyed the little lady, and seated himself beside her.

“Oh, I am so glad I found you!” she exclaimed, with dancing eyes.

“So am I you; very glad,” he answered, quietly.

“Have you got anybody to play with?” was her next question.

“No,” he replied.

“No more have I. What is your name, little boy?”

“Dave.”

“Dave? That means David, doesn’t it?”

“Yes, David; but everybody calls me Dave.”

“Well, what else is your name besides David?”

“Lindsay—David Lindsay.”

“Oh! Uncle reads to us about one—

“‘Sir David Lyndsay of the Mount,
Lord Lion, King at Arms.’
Was he any kin to you?”

“No, there ain’t no kings nor lions about here,” replied the lad, laughing.

“I don’t know. I didn’t think there was any children or playmates about here; but after finding you I should not wonder if I found kings and lions and—and dwarfs and fairies.”

26“I never saw any about here,” said the lad, decidedly.

“David Lindsay, don’t you want to know what my name is?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Well, then, why don’t you ask me?”

“Because—I don’t know—I didn’t like to.”

“Well, my name is Maria da Gloria de la Vera!”

“Oh! what a long name!”

“Yes, but it is a beautiful name, with a beautiful meaning.”

“What does it mean?”

“I believe, but I don’t quite know, that it means the Glory of the Truth, or something like that.”

“It is too long.”

“Yes, it is long as it is spelt and written; but not as it is pronounced, for it is pronounced Davero—Gloria Davero—and the colored folks have got it down to little Glo’.”

“Oh, I like that! Little Glo’!” said the lad, with animation.

“Do you? I am so glad! What does your name mean, David Lindsay?”

“I’m blest if I know what it means, if it means anything at all.”

“But it must mean something, David Lindsay. All names do.”

“Well, then, I will ask my grandmother.”

“Yes, do. Do you like me, David Lindsay?”

“Oh! yes, indeed I do.”

“So do I you, ever so much. What is that you are doing with that long wooden needle and big ball of cord, David Lindsay?”

“I am mending nets.”

27“Oh, how curious it is. Will you show me how to do it, David Lindsay? Is it hard to do?”

“No, it is easy. I will be glad to show you,” said the boy, who then instructed her in the simple stitch by which the nets were made.

“What fun!” exclaimed the child, as her slender little fingers plied the wooden needle in and out among the meshes. “Who taught you to do this, David Lindsay?”

“I——” The boy hesitated and looked puzzled, and then said: “I don’t know. I netted nets ever since I could remember, and before, too, I reckon, but not so large nets as these. I netted minnow nets first, I remember that. I s’pose father must ha’ taught me.”

“Have you got a father and mother, David Lindsay?”

“Yes, in Heaven,” replied the lad, lifting his broken hat and bending his head.

“So have I—in Heaven. Have you got any brothers and sisters, David Lindsay?”

“No, not one.”

“No more have I. Have you got any playmates?”

“No; never had any.”

“No more have I. But now I have you, and you have me, and we will be playmates, won’t we?”

“Yes, indeed!”

“How old are you, David Lindsay?”

“I am almost twelve; I shall be twelve next Fourth of July.”

“Oh, what a splendid birthday! I shall be eight the first of June!”

“June is a nice month, too. The roses are all out,” said the boy.

28The little girl fell into thought for a few minutes, and then she said:

“What made you lift your hat and bend your head when you said ‘Heaven,’ David Lindsay?”

“Grandmother taught me.”

“‘Grandmother!’ Yes, you said grandmother before.”

“She is father’s mother. Father was drowned in a squall while out fishing when I was seven years old. That was in the spring; mother died of pleurisy the next winter; a bitter, bitter winter, when the snow lay two or three feet deep on the ground and drifted around our little house, and there was no one to bring us wood from the main but grandmother and me, and we had to go for it in the boat and couldn’t bring but a little at a time; and we had no doctor and that was the way poor mother died.”

Gloria’s bright eyes were full of tears. She slipped her hand in that of the boy and said:

“But maybe she would have died all the same. My mother had everything in the world, and she died. But you know neither of them really died; they went to heaven.”

“Yes,” said the boy, in a low tone.

“Now, ain’t grown people queer, David Lindsay?”

“How?”

“The way they talk. They will say one minute a man has died and gone to heaven, and the next minute they will say he is buried in such a church-yard. Now, how can he be in heaven and in the ground at the same time?”

“I don’t know. It is a great mystery,” said the boy, gravely.

“I don’t like mysteries. I don’t. They always 29make me feel as if I was in a cellar, or some dark place and in danger. And what is more, I don’t believe in them. I don’t believe my father and mother are buried in the ground. I believe they both went out to heaven before that which they used to live in was put in the ground. And, somehow, inside of myself I know it is so. Do you like to read, David Lindsay?” she asked, abruptly.

“Yes; I learned to read and write at St. Inigoes parish school; but I have no books except Webster’s Spelling Book, and I know every word of that by heart, even the fables.”

“Oh, then I can bring you ever so many books. I have a bookcase full, all of my own, in my room, and uncle has a great room full, from the floor up to the ceiling, all around the walls, you know.”

“That is very good of you. I do thank you. You are the little girl that lives up in the house, then—Colonel de Crespigney’s niece?”

“Yes—no. I mean I am Madame de Crespigney’s niece; though, do you know, it seems so strange, I always feel as if he was more kin to me than she is!”

“I suppose you love him best; that must be the reason. Well, everybody loves Colonel de Crespigney. I know I do. He took me on to work here out of kindness, I am sure, for he couldn’t really want me, you see, so many colored people as he has!”

“He is very, very good, and very unhappy. Where do you live, David Lindsay?” she inquired, with the sudden transition of a child’s thoughts.

“Do you see that little, tiny bit of an island out there by itself?” he said, rising and pointing eastward.

30“What!—that little sandbank?” she exclaimed in surprise.

“Yes, there is a house on it.”

“A mere shed.”

“We live in it, grandmother and I. And we have chickens and ducks, and a little bit of a garden, with a made soil, where we raise radishes and lettuce and cabbage and potatoes.”

“No flowers?”

“Oh, yes; a red rose-bush, and a white rose-bush, and pinks, and pansies and larkspurs.”

“Oh, that is pretty! Is your grandmother nice?”

“Oh! I tell you!” heartily answered the boy.

“Would she let me come to see her?”

“Why, of course she would, and glad!”

“Well, then, will you take me over there to see your grandmother, David Lindsay?”

“Yes, indeed, that I will, if your uncle will let you go.”

“Oh, he’ll let me. But how do you get over there, David Lindsay?” inquired the child, gazing over the expanse of water to the little dot that seemed to be about half-way between the promontory and the eastern horizon.

“Why, in my little row-boat, to be sure. There, there it is, tied to that post,” answered the boy, pointing to a little skiff that was rocking on the water.

“Oh-h-h! And you’ll take me in that? Oh-h-h! Won’t that be splendid! When will you take me, David Lindsay?” she exclaimed, with all a child’s eager delight in an anticipated holiday.

“To-morrow, if they will let you go. To-night when I go home, I will tell my grandmother, and 31she will have something to please you when you come, you know.”

“Will she? Oh, how nice. I am so glad I found you. Ain’t you glad you found me, David Lindsay?”

“Oh, I tell you! Yes, indeed! I was so lonesome here.”

“So was I! But we have found one another; we won’t be lonesome any more, will we? We will have such good times, won’t we now, David Lindsay?”

“Ah!” exclaimed the boy.

“But, oh, I say! See here! I can’t net any more. This hard twine hurts my fingers dreadfully,” said little Glo’, looking at her bruised digits.

“I thought it would. Put it up. It is dinnertime, too.”

“Yes, I suppose it is, and I must go home,” said the child, rising reluctantly.

“Oh, no, please don’t,” eagerly exclaimed the boy. “Stay here and have some of my dinner.”

“Dinner!” exclaimed little Glo’, looking all around them in vain search of a kitchen.

“I have brought it with me in a basket,” David explained, as he lifted a little ragged flag-basket from its hiding-place beside the boat. “Sit down and have some.”

“Oh, yes, thank you, so I will! I like that!” she answered, promptly reseating herself.

He then opened his basket, and took from it, first, a coarse crash towel, which he handed to her, saying:

“Now please to set the table.”

“Set the table?” she echoed, in perplexity.

“Yes, you know, spread that towel on the flat 32stone by you, and I will hand you out the things to put on it.”

“Oh! yes, I know—and play we are housekeeping!” she exclaimed, delightedly, as she laid the cloth.

Then he handed her, in succession, a little cracked, blue-edged white plate, a broken knife and fork, a little paper of salt, another of bread, six hard boiled eggs, and a dozen young radishes, all of which she arranged upon the “table” with funny little housewifely care.

“Now, this will have to be broiled,” he continued, as he took from the bottom of the basket a smoked red herring on a cabbage leaf and laid it on the boat.

“Broiled!” echoed the little housekeeper, as she looked all about in search of a fire.

“Yes,” he answered, laughing, as he went and gathered up some dry, decayed driftwood, and broke it into small chips, and piled it up on some stones. Then he took a tinder box, flint and steel, from his pocket, struck a light, and kindled a fire.

“Oh! that is grand!” exclaimed the delighted child, as she watched him, for all this was play to her.

When the fire had burned down to coals he laid the herring on it.

A fine appetizing flavor soon arose.

Little Glo’ watched the boy as he turned the herring until it was done, and then put it on the blue-edged white plate and set it on the table.

“Oh! isn’t this just perfectly splendid!” again exclaimed the child, as the two sat down to the primitive meal.

33They chatted faster than they ate—at least little Glo’ did.

When it was over and the plates and knife and fork had been put back in the basket, the girl arose, very unwillingly, to depart.

“I must go now,” she said; “they will all be looking for me. But, oh! I have had just such a grand time, and I am so glad we found each other! Ain’t you, David Lindsay?”

“Yes, indeed!” exclaimed the boy.

She laughed, kissed her hand to him, and ran off home, singing as she went.

This was the first meeting between Gloria de la Vera and David Lindsay, the poor fisher lad, whom, a few years later, in her utter desperation, she asked to marry her; but many strange events were to happen before she could be driven to such despair as to cast her beautiful and blameless self, with her rank and fortune, at the feet of this humble lad, “unlearned and poor,” and lose herself in the deep dishonor of a low and loveless marriage.

CHAPTER III
THE GIRL’S MISSION TO THE BOY
She was his star. Byron.
Gloria, singing as she went, and skipping like a kid from point to point, over the breach in the sea wall, and dancing through the old grass meadows and turnip fields—hurried on towards her home.

Suddenly her song ceased, and she stood still.

34She saw her uncle walking alone with slow and melancholy steps, and his head bowed down upon his breast.

She would have spoken to him, but he waved his hand for her to go on to the house.

She looked at him wishfully, hesitatingly; but he only smiled sadly on her and repeated his gesture with more emphasis.

Then she obeyed him and reluctantly went on.

“That was like meeting a ghost,” she said; and she sang no more that day.

She entered the house and met Sophia on her way through the hall with a pail of hot water in her hand and a look of indignation on her face.

“What’s the matter, ’Phia? Has anything happened? I met uncle outside the park wall and he looked awful! awful!” said the child.

“Well he mought,” replied the woman, wrathfully. “There’s been the biggest row you ebber seed in yer life, and you not here to ’vent of it.”

“Was it auntie and uncle?” inquired the child, in a tone of awe.

“Hi, who else? Yes, honey, it was master and mist’ess and de debbil! And you not here to carcumwent Satin!”

“Oh, dear me, I’m so sorry. How did it all happen, ’Phia?”

“Hi! How I know, chile? I wa’n’t dere. It happen in de long sittin’ room, in course, where dey most in gen’al sits. Fust fing we cullud people knowed was de bell rung wiolent, an’ I run up an’ foun’ mist’ess in fits an’ marster tryin’ to fetch her to. We toted her up stairs ’tween us an’ put her to bed. But soon’s ebber she could speak she sent marster out o’ de room. How does it allers happen, 35honey? De debbil! Dere’ll be murder done here some ob dese days—always the debbil, an’ dis time he had it all his own ’fernal way, ’cause you wa’n’t here to carcumwent him.”

“Oh, I am so sorry. Poor uncle! poor auntie!” sighed the child, with a look of age and care coming over her bright young face.

“I’m mad; I ain’t a bit sorry; I’m mad. If dem two fools was chillun, dey’d just get good hoopins for quarrelin’ so; an’ bein’ grown-up ’dults, dey desarves hoopin’ ten times as much as chillun, ’cause dey’s big ’nuff to know better! I gwine up now to put her feet in hot water. I’d like to put him and her bofe in hot water up to deir necks, an’ keep ’em dere till they promise to ’have deirselves better!” exclaimed ’Phia, as she took up the pail and went up stairs.

Gloria looked after her. She felt as if she ought to have rebuked the woman for her manner of speaking; but then she did not wish to raise another domestic storm, and she knew that ’Phia had a temper that blazed up at a word, as stubble flames up at a spark. Indeed, if the child had been required to write ’Phia’s name, she would naturally have written it Fire, and thought that she was right.

She hung her hat and sack on the hall rack, and then went softly up to her aunt’s room to sit with her and be ready to run on any errand that was required.

She sat patiently with her auntie all the afternoon, reading a volume of Peter Parley’s story-books.

In the evening she left her, quietly sleeping, and went down stairs to make tea for her uncle.

It was a rather silent meal. De Crespigney was 36absorbed in thought, and never spoke to the child unless she asked him some question, and then he answered absently, though in the gentlest tone.

After tea she left him sitting in his old leathern arm-chair by the small wood fire that the chill air rendered necessary even in June, and she went up to her own room and crept into bed.

The next morning Madame de Crespigney appeared at the breakfast table as if nothing had happened. These stormy days are followed by calm mornings in the moral as well as in the physical atmosphere.

Gloria knew from experience that after such a tempestuous misunderstanding as they had had on the previous day, her uncle and aunt would have to be left alone to come to a reconciliation. She was also glad of such a good excuse to go out.

So, directly after breakfast, she went up to her bedroom, opened her glass-doored bookcase, and, after taking down and putting up volume after volume, she selected two which she thought would be most beneficial and acceptable to her new friend—these were the charming school books: Peter Parley’s First Book of Geography and Peter Parley’s First Book of History, then just coming into use, both profusely illustrated with maps and pictures.

She put on her little rough-and-ready gray sack and her felt hat—for it was still chilly on the seaside in early June—took the two books under her arm and left the house.

Singing as she tripped along, she hurried blithely down to the breach in the wall, where she found the fisher-boy busily engaged in smoothing that passage by laying the fallen stones a little leveller.

“Oh, good-morning, David Lindsay! Will you 37take me over in your row-boat to see your grandmother this morning?” she asked as she came up.

“Oh, yes, indeed I will, and glad to do it!” replied the lad, lifting his torn hat from his black curls and holding out his hand to help her across the broken wall.

She sat down on the boat to recover her breath, while he said:

“I stayed here last night until ten o’clock, working to finish my nets, and so get time to take you over to-day. And then I came at daybreak this morning, and have been here ever since, so I have earned a holiday.”

“Oh, how good of you to take so much trouble for me; but how could you see to do your work, after the sun went down?”

“The stars came out. It was one of the brightest starlight nights I ever saw! Besides, netting, you know, is such mere finger-work, that I could almost do it with my eyes shut. Are you ready to go?”

“Presently. Sit down here by me, I want to show you something.”

The boy seated himself beside her.

“Here,” she said, producing the First Book in Geography, and opening upon a page of engravings in sections representing the five races of man.

“Oh-h-h!” exclaimed the boy in delight, as he took the volume from her hands and gazed with devouring eyes upon the fascinating page.

He had never seen a picture of an Indian, an Ethiopian, a Mongolian, or a Malay in all his life, and now he gazed in a breathless rapture upon these.

Pictures were almost unknown to him—the pictures in his grandmother’s old family Bible and the 38half-a-dozen little illustrations above the fables in Webster’s Spelling Book, being all that he had ever seen.

“Oh-h-h, you can’t think how much I do thank you for lending me this splendid book!” he exclaimed, with fervent gratitude.

“Oh, indeed, I am ever so much obliged to you for being so pleased with it! It makes me feel so happy, you know! But turn over the next page. Oh, there are ever so many more nice pictures in it!”

“Are there?” he asked, and immediately turned the page to discover more and more treasures—Esquimaux and white bears of the Arctic circle; elk, moose, and reindeer, and red Indians of the northern lakes and forests; seals, beavers, Canadians, New England farms, churches, school-houses, New York seaports, shipping, and warehouses; Western prairies, forests and rivers; Southern bays, isles, and cotton plantations.

“Oh! oh! oh!”

What a treasury of happiness to the poor boy, hungering and thirsting for knowledge, who had scarcely ever seen three books or a dozen pictures in his life before, and who had scarcely any conception of any world beyond the horizon of his natural vision!

And as yet he had seen only a few index pictures of North America.

South America and all the Western Hemisphere was to follow in that delightful book.

“Oh, you never can know how much I thank you for this beautiful book!” he exclaimed, with enthusiasm.

“Why, don’t I tell you I am ever so much obliged 39to you for liking it so well!” said Gloria, her own blue eyes dancing with the delight of delighting.

Over and over he turned the bewitching pages, finding more and more pleasure as he went on even to the end of the book—the picture of the Cape of Good Hope, with Cape Colony.

He had taken some time to look through the volume, pausing long over each picture. So when he closed it, he arose and said:

“I could sit all day and night and look at this book, and forget to eat or sleep, I do believe; but I reckon it is time for us to go now.”

“No, sit down again. I have got something else to show you,” she answered.

He obediently reseated himself, and she put in his hand “The First Book of History,” profusely illustrated with pictures of battles and conventions and portraits of military heroes and statesmen.

“Oh-h-h!” again exclaimed the boy, as he opened at a portrait of George Washington on one side, and the signing of the Declaration of Independence on the other.

He turned over page after page, finding fresh food for intellect and imagination in every one, while the little girl watched him with her blue eyes sparkling in sympathetic pleasure.

“Oh, how rich I shall feel, with these two books to read every night! I shall never go to bed at dusk when granny does because I am lonesome. I shall never be lonesome now,” he said.

“I am so glad, and so very much obliged to you for being so happy over them, David Lindsay,” she repeated, with more emphasis.

There is no knowing how long the two children might have lingered, sitting side by side on the old 40boat—he poring with rapture over the book, she watching his enjoyment with ecstasy; but the hour of noon came and passed, and the healthy young appetite of the boy would not allow him to “forget to eat.”

“Oh, how late it is!” he exclaimed, reluctantly closing the book just at the picture of General Washington receiving the sword of Lord Cornwallis after the battle of Yorktown. “Come, we had better go now.”

“Well, yes, I suppose we had. You can read the books every night, can’t you, David Lindsay?”

“Yes, indeed. And when you are up at the house enjoying yourself with all your friends, you may think of me reading your books.”

“Oh! they are your books, David Lindsay,” she hastened to exclaim.

“I daren’t take them from you only as a loan; but, oh! I can never thank you enough for that. Come carefully over all this rubbish. Let me take your hand. There, now, step into the boat and sit down while I untie her. Don’t be afraid. She will not turn over.”

The child suffered him to put her into the rough little old shell that lay rocking on the sea.

He quickly unmoored the boat, got into it, seated himself, and rowed towards the little sandhill that seemed a mere mote on the water.

David rowed vigorously, and the little skiff shot over the sea, and rapidly approached the island.

First she saw the sandy little hillock; next, that there was a tiny house on it, with trees on the farther side; then, as the boat reached the shore and grounded, she saw that the house was a small cottage with a gable roof and one chimney; with one 41door and window on the ground floor, and one tiny, square window above in the gable. There were no shutters to the windows, but they were shaded from within by flowered wall-paper blinds. The little house was whitewashed with lime, and the door was painted with red ochre, a coarse coloring matter got from the soil on the main. A little garden around the house, with a “made soil,” was fenced in with a whitewashed picket fence. Lilies, Canterbury-bells, hollyhocks, pinks, larkspurs, and other sweet, old-fashioned flowers grew in the front yard. A red rose-bush and a white rose-bush were trained, one on each side of the door. A white dog, of a nondescript race, was asleep on the step, and a black kitten was curled up snugly on his back. These proverbial “natural enemies” had never been anything but loving friends.

At the approach of David the dog sprang up, wide awake, overturning the kitten, who put up her back, gaped, and stretched herself, while Jack ran forward and leaped upon his master, who did not order him “down, sir!” but patted his head and returned caress for caress.

The red door opened then, and a smiling old woman appeared—Mrs. Lindsay, David’s grandmother.

She was a small, plump, fair-faced, blue-eyed dame, with the white hair of sixty years parted plainly over her forehead, and banded back under a clean linen cap. She wore a striped blue and white cotton gown, of her own spinning and weaving, and a white handkerchief folded over her bosom, and a white apron tied before her gown.

She came forward, smiling pleasantly as she held out her hand to the child, while she spoke to David.

42“Is this the little lady you have brought to visit me? I am very pleased to see thee, my dear.”

“Oh, thank you, ma’am! It was so nice of you to let me come! And I like David Lindsay. He is all the playmate I have got. But he’s splendid!” said the child, with enthusiasm.

The old woman smiled on her, patted the tiny hand she held in her own, and then led her into the house.

It was a good sized room, with clean, whitewashed walls, the one window shaded with a home-made blind of flowered wall-paper; the floor of wide planks, perfectly bare, yet scrubbed to a creamy whiteness; in one corner a neat bed, with a patchwork quilt and snowy pillows; in another corner a loom, with a piece of cloth in process of weaving; in a third, a large spinning-wheel; in the fourth, a corner cupboard, with glass doors in the upper part, through which might be seen the clean, coarse, blue-edged crockery ware, and the bright pewter dishes of the little ménage.

In the middle of the floor stood a table covered with a coarse but snow-white cloth, and adorned with blue-edge cups and saucers and plates, while on the clean, red ochre-painted hearth stood a tea-pot and several covered plates and dishes, before the clear fire in the small open fireplace.

“Come, lass, let me take off ’ee coat,” said the kind little woman, beginning to unbutton and untie until she had relieved the child of her hat and sack.

“Now, sit ’ee down, lass, while I put dinner on the table,” she continued, depositing her small visitor on a low chip-bottomed chair, near the windowsill, 43on which stood a box of mignonette, that filled the homely room with fragrance.

“’Ee’s late, Dave. I thought ’ee’d be here wi’ the lass an hour ago, and had all ready for ’ee,” said the old woman, as she began to place dinner on the table.

“We were reading of a book what the little lady loaned me,” replied the boy, as he carefully placed the two volumes on each side the Bible, which stood upon a chest of drawers at the end of the room, between the bed and the corner cupboard.

“It was my fault. I stopped David Lindsay to show him the books,” put in the child.

“It wasn’t ’ee fault, then. It was ’ee goodness, little lass. And it’s na great matter. The dinner is no sich that it can be spoiled,” said Dame Lindsay, as she placed the last dish on the table, and then led her small guest to a seat.

Poor as these cotters were in all things else, they were not poor in regard to food.

The sea supplied them with fish for immediate use, and for salting away against winter; the two pigs that they bought and raised at a trifling cost every year, provided them with pork and bacon; the small poultry-yard with fowls and eggs; the patch of garden with vegetables and fruit; the little Alderney cow with milk and butter.

The few other provisions they needed were easily procurable at the nearest country store on the main, in exchange for the excellent cotton hose and mittens knit by the industrious and skillful hands of the old dame.

Other trifling expenses of the little household were met by the money earned by David on the fishing landing of the promontory.

44The dainty midday meat set before the little lady guest was not at all an every-day affair, but was got up expressly for her. It was very attractive—nice fragrant tea, with rich cream and white sugar; nice light, home-made bread, with sweet, fresh butter; fried bluefish, just out of the sea; poached eggs on toast; boiled spring chicken; mashed potatoes, green peas, lettuce, radishes, and, finally, cherry pie, strawberries and cream, and a plenty of new milk.

Little Glo’ ate—well, like a healthy child, with an excellent appetite, and no one near to curb it.

“It is the nicest dinner I ever had in all the days of my life, and—I have been at big dinner parties, too, before I came to the promontory!” she declared, with equal frankness and emphasis, as she arose from the table.

At least, it was the most enjoyable.

The old dame smiled on her, and David felt so pleased and proud!

Ay! the Earl of Leicester entertaining Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth Castle could not have felt more elevated in spirits by her majesty’s august approbation than was the fisher-boy by the pleasure of his little lady guest.

“Mayhap ’ee’ll come again to see us, little lady,” said the old dame.

“Oh, indeed, indeed, indeed I will! Just as often as you’ll please to let me come! Oh, it is so nice here! I’ll be sure to come just as often as ever you will let me come!” exclaimed the child, heartily.

“That will be as often as ’ee likes,” said the old dame.

Then, assisted by David, she hastily cleared away the table, taking the dishes into the “lean-to” behind 45the cottage, there to remain until she could wash them up after the departure of the visitor.

Then she set herself to entertain the little lady.

She showed her all the few curiosities of the cottage—some strange South Sea shells that had been brought home by a sailor ancestor ages before, and which now decorated the low wooden chimney shelf; then the rusty old gun that had been carried by her own grandfather in the Revolutionary War; then some stuffed birds, some skeletons of strange fish, and some odd-looking pebbles from the beach.

Next she exhibited some of the small treasures of her chest of drawers—a curious patchwork quilt that had won the prize in a certain agricultural and industrial fair held at St. Inigoes many years before.

“And did you sew all these little pieces of colored calico and white cotton together with your own fingers?” inquired the child, with interest.

“Yes, dearie, I did.”

“Oh, how curious and how pretty! How I would like to do that! We have got ever and ever so many calico and cotton pieces in the scrap-bags at home! If I bring some over here, when I come again, will you show me how to cut the pieces into leaves, and flowers, and things, and sew them together like this?”

“Yes, little lass, I will teach ’ee with good will; for I do think it a merit to save up the scraps and turn them to good account, though they do tell me that now-a-days quilts are made by masonry, and sell cheaper than we could make ’em by hand. ’Ee sees, dearie, I use to make ’em to sell; but now I can’t get anybody to give me enough to pay for my work on ’em. So now I knit socks and mittens.”

46“They make them by machinery, too,” said the child.

“Yes, and I shouldn’t wonder and they didn’t come to hatch chickens by masonry some of these days! Well a day! No masonry stockings can eekill my knitted stockings, and that the storekeeper knows, and allus takes ’em from me and pays me well in tea and sugar, and whatever I may want. As to the quilt-piecing, lass, I’ll teach ’ee with good will. ’Ee’s a plenty of leisure, I’ll warrant, and ’ee’s well spend it that way in saving the scraps and turning ’em to account as in another,” concluded the canny old dame, as she folded her prize quilt, replaced it, and closed the drawer.

“Oh, I think it is such pretty and curious work, and it is so—economical!” said the little child-woman. “I shall be so glad to learn!”

“She likes to learn everything she sees going on,” added David, who, with his hands in his pockets, stood a smiling spectator of the scene.

“That’s right. Larn all ’ee can, little lass. Now come wi’ me, and I’ll show ’ee the young ducks that were hatched yesterday.”

“Oh!” cried the child, jumping up in glee. “I never saw young ducks in all my life! What a nice place this is!”

“What! Don’t they show ’ee the young things up by, at the house?” inquired the dame.

“No, ma’am; they never thought of it, I reckon; no more did I,” answered the child, as she followed her conductress out into the poultry-yard.

She saw the young ducklings that were just out; then she saw the little chickens that were a week old, and seemed to know as much about life as she 47herself did. Then she was taken through the garden, and she saw the strawberry bed and the one cherry tree, with its bright red fruit hiding in its green leaves, and the crooked apple tree that bore the green sweetings which would soon be ripe, and the currant bushes along the walk, with the small beds of peas and cabbage and corn between them, and then the bee hive and the two white pigs, and Winny, the little black and white cow, in her shed.

Then they went in.

“Oh! what a nice place this is! The nicest place I ever saw!” said the child.

“’Ee must come often to see it, if ’ee likes it so well,” said the dame, who felt flattered by the child’s sincere admiration; “’ee must come often, but now it is getting late i’ the afternoon, and I must send ’ee home to ’ee friends, lest harm come to ’ee through this visit.”

David, who had kept close to the pair all the day, now left them to get the boat ready.

The old dame carefully put on the child’s hat and sack, and then threw a shawl over her own head, and led the little one down to the water’s edge, where David stood in the boat, waiting.

The child threw her arms around the old woman’s neck, and kissed her heartily, many times, thanking her warmly for the “happy, happy day” she had had.

The dame responded cordially.

David then handed the little girl into the boat, unmoored, and rowed rapidly for the promontory landing, which they reached in a few minutes.

The sun was just setting.

“Oh, David Lindsay, I have had such a splendid 48time! Oh! I am so glad I found you!” exclaimed little Glo’, as he helped her out of the boat.

“Oh, so am I! Ever so glad! And I think we ought to thank the Lord!” he added, solemnly.

“Oh! I will, when I say my prayers to-night. Are you going to study your books this evening, David Lindsay?”

“Yes, indeed. What are you going to do?”

“Oh, I—I think I will look out some more books for you, and then I will hunt out some pretty bright pieces of calico from the scrap-bag, to learn to make patchwork quilts, and have them ready against the next time I go to see your grandmother.”

“When will you come again? To-morrow?” anxiously inquired the boy, as he leaned on his oar.

“Oh, no, not to-morrow; not to see your grandmother, to put her to so much trouble, you know; but I will come down here to the landing to see you, David Lindsay.”

“Oh, yes, please do.”

“Well, good-bye, David Lindsay.”

“Good-bye.”

“God bless you, David Lindsay!”

“And you, too.”

“I won’t forget to thank Him when I say my prayers to-night.”

“No more will I.”

“Well, good-bye again, David Lindsay.”

“Good-bye.” He did not want to call her Miss de la Vera, much less Miss Gloria; he could not call her little Glo’. He felt, without in the least understanding his feelings, that the first style would be too cold and stiff, and the last perhaps too familiar, so he called her “you,” putting all respect in his low and modulated tone. There was much of nature’s 49gentleman in this poor little lad in the ragged straw hat.

He waited, hat in hand, until she had turned and tripped lightly over the broken sea-wall and passed out of sight.

Then he covered his head, sat down in his boat, took the oar and reluctantly shoved off from the shore, while she ran home, singing and dancing as she went.

She ran into the house and went directly to seek Sophia.

“Have they been worried about me, ’Phia?” she inquired.

“No, honey; dey’s been too much took up wid ’spoundin’ an’ ’splainin’ ’bout yes’day’s fuss to fink ’bout you. Leastways, mist’ess was; dough marster did ’quire arter you when dey sat down to dinner an’ you wa’n’t dere. Says he:

“‘Whey’s de chile?’

“Says she:

“‘Oh, never mind de chile; she’s running round de place somew’ere, an’ ’Phia can give her her dinner when she comes in. Tell me what you meant by——’ somefin’ or oder, Lord knows what, honey; but at it dey went, ’spoundin’ and ’splainin’. But where is you been all de live-long day, little Glo’?” demanded the woman.

“Oh, ’Phia! I have had such a happy, happy day!” replied the child.

And then she told the cook all about her visit, adding:

“And granny Lindsay begged me to come ever so often!”

“Yes, honey; mighty good ob de ole woman. I knows her, honey, and has buyed mittens ob her—woolen 50mittens, which she knitted, honey. But you mustn’t go too often, honey. One fing, you mustn’t be too intimit wid people ob dat low order ob deciety. Not as I am sayin’ but dey may be jes’ as good as we is, in de sight ob de Lord, if dey ’haves deirselves; but still, ’ciety is to be despected. An’ another fing, honey, is, dey can’t deford it; dey can’t, indeed; dey can’t deford to ’tain a little lady on fry chickens an’ sich, werry often.”

Now, the first clause of this speech, concerning caste, slipped through the child’s ears without making the slightest impression, but the second clause, about the expense of her visit to the fisherman’s cottage, fixed her attention.

“Oh, yes, I thought of that; so I told David Lindsay I could not go to-morrow. ’Phia, you are right,” she said, as she ran up stairs. She did not go to the sitting-room to interrupt the tête-à-tête of her aunt and uncle, but up to the attic to hunt for bright pieces in the scrap-bag, singing and dancing as she went.

When she met her relatives at tea that night they did not even think of asking her where she had been. They seemed to take it for granted that she had come in soon after dinner, and had been properly attended by ’Phia.

So the child’s holiday escaped their notice.

The next morning, Gloria, true to her promise, went down to the landing, where she found David sitting in the old boat, mending nets.

His face broke into a smile as he took off his hat and stood up to receive her.

“Good-morning, David Lindsay. Did you study your book last night?” she inquired, with childish frankness.

51“Oh, yes, indeed! And I have brought the geography here with me to take a glimpse of it now and then; but it is such a temptation to slight my work, that I shall have to leave it home after this,” replied the lad, still standing, hat in hand.

“Oh, no, don’t you do that, David Lindsay! Please don’t! See, now, sit down and take up your netting and go on with it, and I will sit by and read the lessons out, and ask the questions at the bottom of the page, so you can tell if you know them.”

“Oh, yes, I shall like that; for then I can do my work and learn my lesson at the same time. How good you are to me. What makes you so good to me?”

“Why,” she said, opening her blue eyes wide and looking at him with surprise, “don’t you know? You are my playmate, and we are going to play school?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Now give me the book, David Lindsay, and sit down and go on with your netting. Now, how far had you got?” she inquired, when they were seated opposite each other in the old stranded boat.

“Up to ‘What is a cape?’”

“Oh, yes, I can find the place. Now pay attention, David Lindsay,” she said, as she took up the book, opened it, assumed a grave, school-ma’am air, and asked:

“‘What is a cape?’”

“‘A cape is a point of land pretending into the sea,’” answered the pupil.

“‘Ex-tending into the sea,’ David Lindsay,” corrected the little teacher.

“‘EX-tending into the sea,’” emphatically amended the pupil.

52“That is right. Now, then, ‘What is a promontory?’”

“‘A promontory is a high point of land pre——’”

“No!”

“EX——”

“Yes.”

“EX-tending into the sea!”

“That is right, David Lindsay. You will soon learn geography.”

She went on with the lesson, slowly drilling it into the head of the boy, who, with his divided attention, was a fair illustration of “the pursuit of knowledge under difficulties.”

But before his little teacher left him that day, he had managed to master the principal divisions of land and water, and better than all, he had been inspired with the love and desire of knowledge.

This was the little lady’s mission to the fisher lad, who, a few years later, in the desperation of her unparalleled extremity, she was to ask to be her husband.

CHAPTER IV
LITTLE GLO’S JOY AND WOE
She grew a flower of mind and eye.
Wordsworth.
We have lingered a little over these first days of their childish friendship, because they were types of so many days that followed, all through the budding spring, the blooming summer, and the fruitful autumn.

53The little girl was allowed to do very much as she pleased by her studious uncle and invalid aunt, as it was scarcely possible that she would “run into any danger, or fall into any sin,” on so isolated a place as the promontory, where there was neither evil companions or wild beasts to deprave or destroy her.

On the main she might have been more closely looked after; but here she was so safe that not a thought was given to her safety.

So, every day, when it did not rain, little Gloria went down to the landing to see her playmate and read to him while he mended old nets and seines, or made new ones.

At first she was only “playing school,” but later on she understood her work and grew interested in the progress of her pupil; and thus her play rose into “a labor of love.”

Together they went through the First Book in Geography, and the First Book in History, and the Primary Grammar.

And in this way the child not only advanced her pupil playmate, but refreshed her own memory in those studies, which had been too much neglected since her arrival at the promontory.

A pure, sweet, and faithful affection grew up between the two children, such as we have sometimes seen between two little girls or two little boys; only because neither Gloria nor David had any other playmate to divide their attention, their innocent affection was all the stronger, deeper, and more devoted in its exclusiveness.

Very often, too, the fisher-boy brought an invitation from his grandmother to the little lady to spend a day on the sandhill which the old dame 54called her home. It was always accepted, and always Gloria had “a happy, happy day.”

She learned of the old cottager to net, to knit, to sew, to piece patchwork quilts out of scraps of bright calico and white linen, and to plait doormats out of strips of brilliant cloth or flannel—arts not likely to be of much use to the West Indian heiress—but she liked to learn them, notwithstanding.

“Wouldn’t I make a right good little cottage girl, after all, Granny Lindsay?” she once asked her old friend, in her childish love of approbation.

“’Ee would, my darling,” said the old dame, tenderly. “’Ee would make a helpful, loving little lass by the cottage fire, or a gracious benign princess in a palace. The world’s breath of sunshine is for ’ee, my flower, from the cottage to the palace.”

“I saw some palaces in Havana, but I would rather have a cottage just like this! Oh, I think a cottage is so nice and cosy, and so—SPLENDID!” exclaimed the little girl, with childlike exaggeration and misapplication of words.

So the once lonely child found much joy in her humble friends, giving and receiving good, while spring bloomed into summer, and summer ripened into autumn, and autumn faded into winter.

Then came cold, and frost, and change, a bitter change for little Gloria.

Her playmate’s work was now the clearing up of the fishing landing, mending boats and oars, and putting them away for winter—work that could not go on parallel with his studies, which were now pursued in the evenings at his own home.

Yet Gloria came down late in the afternoon on every clear day to hear him say his lessons. He told 55her that this helped him on “ever so much.” And it pleased her.

One day after sunset, when she had heard her pupil’s lesson in a very elementary book of astronomy, and had praised his quick apprehension and patient application, and had greatly encouraged him, as she always did, she took leave and ran home, singing and dancing as she went.

When she reached the house, she found ’Phia at the door, looking out for her.

“Oh, for goodness’ sake, come in, child,” said the woman, in a frightened tone.

“What—what is the matter? What has happened?” cried Gloria, catching terror from the other.

“I dunno. Somefin’ awful! Mistress has been goin’ on at that rate! She done put de debbil in marster now, sure! Mind, I tell you, honey, dere’ll be murder done here some ob dese days! Mark my words!”

With a slight scream the terrified child fled from this prophetess of evil toward the sitting-room, where she heard the sound of high words.

She opened the door and hurried in.

And this was what she saw:

Her uncle standing on the corner of the hearth, with his elbow on the mantelpiece, his head leaning on his hand, whose fingers were clutched into his black hair; his starting black eyes staring down upon the floor; his black brows knitted, his teeth clenched, his face pallid with suppressed passion.

Her aunt, with her white dress and yellow hair in wild disorder, as if her own desperate hands had rent and torn them, was raging up and down the floor like a tigress in her cage, pouring forth all the 56gall and venom of her jealous fury, in words that might never be forgiven or forgotten.

Even the child intuitively perceived this, and feared that the man, stung to madness by the woman’s venomed tongue, might be driven to some rash act, fatal to them both.

She looked, shuddering, from one to the other.

It was terrible to see so fragile a creature as Eusebie in the power of such a tremendous passion, that seemed as if it must shrivel her frame as a cobweb in a flame. But it was more terrible to see in Marcel’s whole aspect the chained devil that might break loose in destroying frenzy at any moment. Full of fear and horror, the child crept trembling to the man’s side, put her arms around his waist, which she could just reach, looked up piteously in his face and whispered, in her coaxing tone:

“Uncle, uncle, uncle.”

“My little angel,” he murmured in reply, as his stern dark face softened and brightened.

“Come away from that man this instant, Gloria,” cried Eusebie, stopping in her wild walk and stamping with fury. “Come away from him, I command you! He is not your uncle! You shall not call him uncle! He is a traitor and a villain! Come away, I say!”

The child did not obey; she could not move; she was half paralyzed by fear and horror, and more likely to sink than to stand.

The man put his arm around her, and drew her closer to him.

The woman stamped with fury.

“Let my niece go, you caitiff!” she screamed.

He did not reply to this, but lifted his head and glared at her, while his face darkened and hardened.

57The terrified child—terrified for others, not for herself—pressed closely to him, as if, in extremity, she would hold him back by her own baby strength, and moaned, coaxingly:

“Uncle, uncle, uncle dear.”

Again his face changed; he stooped towards her and she laid her cheek against his lips.

“Come away from that man, or I will tear you from him! He is not your uncle! He is no kin to you! He is nothing to you! No! I thank Heaven that not one drop of his false, black blood runs in the veins of any one belonging to me! I have not even a child! Ha! ha! I know the reason! Fiends are not permitted to be fathers!” hissed the woman, with all the hate and scorn that Satan could cast into her face and voice.

Here the man’s eyes glared so fiercely, while his brow grew so black, that the child clasped him in a frantic clutch, moaning, inarticulately, some words of piteous deprecation to restrain him.

“Leave that wretch this instant, I command you! His contact is infamy! Am I not to be obeyed? Oh, then I will snatch you from him!” screamed the woman, in blind fury, as she sprang towards them; but he was too quick for her.

He lifted the half-fainting child in his arms and bore her swiftly out of the room.

“Oh, uncle, she is crazy! She does not know what she says! Don’t mind her! Don’t go back in the room,” coaxed the child, as she put up her hand and stroked and patted his cheek. “Uncle, dear, don’t go back in the room! Come with me to Granny Lindsay’s cottage. Oh, it is so heavenly there.”

But now the man paid but little attention to what she said. He pulled the bell-cord violently.

58’Phia ran to answer the bell.

“Take this child up to her bedroom, and stay with her until she goes to sleep,” he said, placing the little girl in the strong arms of the colored woman.

“Oh, uncle, don’t go back to that room! Don’t, or if you do, take me with you!” pleaded the child, caressing his cheek with her hand.

“Go, my dear, go to bed. Pandemonium is no place for babies. Leave me to deal with that demoniac,” he answered, grimly, as he turned away.

“Oh, uncle, don’t mind her! She don’t know what she says!” pleaded the child, stretching out her hands imploringly towards him.

But he had re-entered the room and clapped the door to behind him.

Gloria slid from the woman’s arms, sat down on the lowest step of the stairs and burst into tears.

“Come to bed, honey. Don’t sit there crying. You can’t do no good by dat. You can’t ’vent de debbil from habbin’ his own way dis night,” said ’Phia.

“Oh, I know—I know—I know!” sobbed the child.

“Well, den, come along up to bed, and I’ll stay ’long ob you for company.”

“Oh, I can’t—I can’t—I can’t—I’m so ’fraid. Let me sit here and wait——”

“Wait for what?”

“Oh, till uncle comes out, or one of them does. Oh, I couldn’t go to bed! I couldn’t go to sleep and leave them so! Hush!” suddenly exclaimed the child, breaking off in her talk, and bending forward her head and straining her sense in fearful attention, as she heard her uncle’s voice in low, tense, bitter 59tones, and then her aunt’s hissing tongue in reply.

The child clasped her hands in a piteous, helpless agony of prayer.

“Come, come, honey, come up to bed, and I will sit by you and tell you pretty stories about foxes and hares, and dwarfs and giants, and little pigs and things, like I used to do,” said ’Phia.

“Hush!” exclaimed the child, starting forward, with staring eyes, as the voices in the closed room sunk lower and became more bitter, intense and hissing.

“Come, come, honey, you must come to bed. ’Tain’t right to be listening, nohow!” expostulated Sophia, in virtuous indignation.

“Oh! I know it is not! I know it is not! And I can’t hear a word they say. I only want to know—want to know——Oh! I’m so afraid! I’m so afraid, ’Phia!” gasped the child, shuddering from head to foot.

“’Fraid o’ what?”

“Oh! ’fraid of something happening!” panted the little girl.

“You can’t help of what happens, so what’s the use o’ bein’ afeard?”

At that moment the voices in the closed room arose, both speaking together in violent, clashing frenzy.

“Oh, ’Phia! Let’s go in! Let’s go in and stand between them!” pleaded the child, springing up.

“Who?—me? No, I thank you, honey! I’m spunky enough, but I ain’t gwine to part a wolf from a wildcat, dere!”

“Then I will! I will!” cried the brave child, running and flinging herself against the closed door; 60but it was locked fast, and resisted all her efforts, while the angry voices within clashed together in rage.

Suddenly one voice arose above the other, with the roar of an infuriated wild beast. It was her uncle’s voice. It cried:

“DIE, then! and end it all!”

There was a heavy fall and groan.

With a shriek of horror Gloria arose and fled to the negro woman and buried her face in her bosom.

The next instant the door was suddenly unlocked and thrown open, and Marcellus de Crespigney—his face haggard, his eyes starting, his hair bristling—ran out, tore open the hall door and rushed from the house out into the winter night.

“I must go see what’s happened,” hastily muttered the black woman, in a voice full of awe, as she put the child off her knee and went toward the sitting-room.

Gloria, tottering, moaning, sobbing piteously, followed.

The long room was silent and almost dark, for the candles had not been called for, and there was no light except from the smouldering logs of the fire in the open chimney.

Fallen on a rug before this fire, lay a white form.

Sophia stooped to look at it, and instantly started up in horror, crying out:

“Lord have mercy upon us! He has killed her! Marster has murdered mist’ess!”

He had!

There in a little pool of her own blood, lay the small, white face of Eusebie, with its eyes wide open and glazed.

She was quite dead.

61
CHAPTER V
REMORSE
And well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, deep, compassionate remorse.
Shakespeare.
Filled with horror, that subdued all outward show of emotion, the old black woman lifted the light form of her mistress and bore it across the room to the lounge.

Overcome with grief and terror, the child followed her, shaking as with a hard ague fit.

’Phia laid the fast-stiffening body down on the couch and straightened the limbs, and drew the white dress down to the small, rigid feet.

Little Gloria stood by, clasping the woman’s skirts, and crying and sobbing as if her heart would burst.

When ’Phia had decently composed the small body, she went to the bell and rang it sharply, then she turned the key of the door and came back to her post.

She gazed for a moment on the poor, dead face, and then tenderly closed the eyes, keeping her fingers and thumb lightly pressed on the white lids.

Some one came running swiftly along the passage outside, tried the lock, and then rapped.

’Phia went and unlocked the door, holding it a few inches apart, to prevent the entrance of the new-comer.

There were but three servants in that reduced establishment—’Phia, 62her husband Laban, and her daughter Lamia.

It was the latter who had come to answer the bell.

“What does yer want, mammy?” inquired the girl, seeing that her mother barred her farther progress.

“You tell your daddy to run here right off. No nonsense, now; not to ’lay a minute, but to run here right off! Yer hear me, don’t yer?”

“Yes, mammy; but daddy done gone ’way in de boat to Sinnigger’s.”

“Whey?” sharply demanded the woman.

“To Sinnigger’s, mammy.”

“What he done gone dere for, when he wanted so bad here?”

“Marster done sent him dere arter de doctor. Marster come a-rabin’ out to de quarter, just now, like he gone rip stabin’ mad, an’ say how mist’ess wer’ took berry ill, an’ he hauled off daddy down to de landin’ to start him off to Sinnigger’s arter de doctor. Is mist’ess dat bad, sure ’nough?”

“Hum! Sent arter de doctor, eh? No use send arter de doctor now. Set a house afire, an’ den run for a gourd o’ water to put it out! Hum! Dat a blind!” muttered ’Phia.

“Is mist’ess so berry bad?” inquired the girl.

“So yer daddy’s gone to Sinnigger’s. Whey’s yer marster?”

“Marster done gone down to de boat landin’ to hurry daddy off, I telled you before, mammy. But, say, is mist’ess bad as all dat comes to?” inquired the girl for the third time.

“It ain’t none o’ your business! You go right straight down de kitchen and put on a kettle ob 63water to heat,” replied the woman, closing the door on her daughter.

“Sent for de doctor! Hum. Dat piece ob ’ception ain’t a gwine to do no good. Lord, Lord, did I ebber expect to lib to see dis awful day? Dough I hab offen an’ offen prophesied as how murder would be done in dis forsak, unlawful house, did I ebber expect as it would come to pass? He’s done it, an’ he’ll sure to be hung, an’ den what is to come ob de place? O-o-m-me,” groaned the woman, as she returned to her post of duty.

At these dreadful words, the voice of the child, that had sunk into low sobs, now arose in wails of anguish.

The next moment the door was thrown open and Marcellus de Crespigney hurried into the room, haggard, ghastly, with distended eyeballs and disheveled hair. After rapidly glancing around the room, his eyes fell upon the form lying on the lounge, and he hurried up to it, breathing hard, as he put the questions:

“How is she? How is she? Better?”

The appalled woman silently moved aside and the child crouched down upon the floor and made room for him.

He stooped anxiously over the rigid form, looked deeply into the marble face and uttered a cry which those that heard never forgot in all their after life.

Then dashing his hand violently against his forehead, he flung himself down by the couch, and dropped his head upon the cold breast of his wife, wailing forth:

“Dead! Dead! Dead! And I have killed her! I, a murderer, most accursed!”

He was totally unconscious of the sobbing child 64at his feet, or the frowning woman who stood with folded arms, like a black Nemesis, at his back. He had eyes for neither—for nothing but the lifeless form before him.

Gazing on her, pressing his lips to her cold brow, again and again, he broke into the most violent lamentations, the most awful self-accusations.

Then hiding his head in the folds of her raiment, he groaned aloud and seemed to swoon into silence.

Again, with an accession of frenzy, he started up and began striding to and fro, from end to end of the long room, uttering the most agonized self-reproaches, and calling down the most horrible maledictions upon his own head.

This terrible scene went on until at last the weeping child, her heart half broken with grief for her who was beyond suffering, and for him who still suffered, arose from her crouching position and dried her tears and tried to still her sobs, and went to the maddened man, as he raged up and down the floor, invoking imprecations on his own head.

She came behind him, pleading in her pitiful tones:

“Oh, uncle, do not curse yourself! Pray! The Lord is merciful!” And she put her little hand out to touch his.

Then he whirled around upon her like a furious wind, his eyes flashing lightnings of frenzy, his voice thundering:

“Avaunt! Begone! Let no innocent thing come near me!”

The child turned and fled and buried her face in the lap of Sophia, who was now seated by the dead body of her mistress.

65“Let me take you to bed, little Glo’,” whispered the woman.

“No—no,” sobbed the aggrieved and terrified child. “No—no. I want to stay near him! I—I want to stay near him!”

Three dreadful hours passed in this way, with little change.

Sophia sat near the head of the lounge, keeping constant watch over the corpse.

Little Gloria crouched on the floor at her feet, with her head hidden in the old woman’s lap.

Marcellus de Crespigney raged up and down the floor, breathing maledictions upon himself, or he dropped down before the dead body of his wife, uttering awful groans or lapsing into more awful silence.

An hour after midnight there came a sound of footsteps, crunching through the frozen snow, and followed by an alarm on the iron knocker at the front door, which announced the arrival of Dr. Prout, the physician of St. Inigoes.

De Crespigney, almost exhausted by the long continued violence of his emotions, was now calm with the calmness of prostration and despair.

“Nothing serious the matter, I hope!” said the cordial voice of the doctor, as he entered the room, ushered by Laban, and met by Colonel de Crespigney, who advanced to receive him.

The physician of St. Inigoes was a short, stout, round-bodied little old man, with a bald head, a smooth face, cheery voice and manner. He was always dressed in speckless black from head to foot.

“Nothing serious, I hope? Only one of madame’s usual nervous attacks, eh?” he cheerfully demanded, 66as he shook hands with the master of the house.

“It is her last attack, sir. She is dead,” answered De Crespigney, in steady tones.

“Dead? Lord bless my soul, I am—I—dead, do you say?” exclaimed the doctor, in surprise and confusion.

“Yes, sir, she is gone. Come and see.”

“Lord bless my soul, I am very much shocked!” exclaimed the good little man, as he followed the bereaved husband to the lounge on which the body of the ill-fated wife lay.

Old ’Phia lifted the white handkerchief that covered the white face, and then withdrew to give way to her master and the doctor, leading the trembling child away with her.

“How did this happen?” solemnly inquired the doctor, as he gazed down on the waxen face, with the stream of scarlet blood curdled from the corner of the mouth down upon the chin and throat, where it lay in a thick cake.

“Through me. I killed her,” answered De Crespigney, in the same dread monotone in which all his answers to the doctor’s questions had been made.

Dr. Prout turned and gazed at him in amazement for a moment, and then said gravely and kindly:

“My dear friend, this shock has been too much for you. Compose yourself. This unhappy lady has had a fatal hemorrhage of the lungs, such as I feared for a long time past; such as I warned you might be the result of any unusual excitement.”

“Just so, you warned me, yet I killed her.”

The doctor looked at him in a great trouble, then replaced the handkerchief over the quiet face of the 67dead, and taking his arm led him to a distant sofa, placed him on it, took the seat beside him, and said:

“De Crespigney, you must not say such false things about yourself. Think what the effect upon other minds may be.”

“They are not false; they are true. Listen to me, Dr. Prout. You know you warned me that excitement might prove fatal to my unhappy wife.”

“Yes.”

“You know how prone she was to excitement. You knew her delicate health and her extreme nervous irritability?”

“I knew the weakness of her lungs and the violence of her temper. I knew all that, Colonel de Crespigney, before you ever saw her face.”

“Let that pass,” said Marcel, waving his hand impatiently. “You warned me against the danger of excitement for her. I was not man enough to heed your warning in her behalf. I have been frenzied to-night, Dr. Prout. But attend! This evening I irritated her, excited, taunted, maddened, murdered her!”

“Oh, my dear Colonel. Oh, tut, tut, tut!”

“But hear me! I must tell some one. Oh, this necessity of confession—this afternoon a dispute arose between us, indeed I know not how—I should have calmed, soothed, conciliated her, knowing how dangerous was excitement to that poor, fragile being! But I did not. When she accused me, I recriminated; when she reproached me, I retorted. ‘One word brought on another,’ as the people say. She grew frantic and knew not what she said, I do verily believe. Yet her words stung me to frenzy, and, forgetting my manhood, I—I——”

Here Marcel de Crespigney’s voice broke, and he 68covered his brow with his hand and dropped his head upon his breast with a look of unutterable shame.

“You never could have raised your hand against your wife, De Crespigney?” exclaimed the doctor, in a harsh voice, and shrinking away from his companion.

Up went the fine head, and wide open with astonishment at such a question the splendid eyes, as Marcel replied:

“Who—I? I raise my hand against that poor little, fragile being? I raise my hand against any woman? I may be a devil, Dr. Prout, but I am not—a—what would you call a man who would strike a woman anyway? I am sure I don’t know.”

“Pardon me the base thought, De Crespigney. It was but a passing thought. Scarcely that indeed. But what do you mean, then, by your self-accusations, my poor friend?”

“I killed her all the same. If I did not strike with my hand, I struck with the poisoned arrow of the tongue. Is any serpent’s sting so venomous as the tongue? Her tongue had stung me to frenzy. She accused me, poor, wrong-headed child that she was, she accused me of marrying her for money, for this miserable, sterile promontory, with its ruinous house and worthless land. I retorted by telling her I married her for pity. “Yes!” cried Marcel, suddenly starting up, and striding to and fro with rising excitement, “yes, villain! caitiff! cur that I was, I told my wife—I told that delicate and sensitive creature that I had married her only for pity! And worse, far worse than that, I saw her pale face grow scarlet at my cruel, shameful words, then, white as death, as she sank upon a chair and placed 69her hand upon her chest. I did not care. The devil had possession of me.””

“‘You will kill me,’ she gasped.

“‘Die, then, and end it all!’ I answered, brutally, for I half suspected she was acting all this illness. But the next instant she fell heavily forward, with the blood welling from her throat.”

“Gracious Heaven!” murmured the doctor in a low tone.

“I remembered what you had warned me to do in case of such an emergency. I went and laid her down on the rugs quietly, and then ran out and dispatched a servant for you. In ten minutes I was back again at her side, but—she was gone.”

“I came the very moment that I was summoned, but the way was long,” said the doctor.

“You could have done no good, as it turned out, even if you had been in the house. The fault was mine. I killed her! I killed the poor little fragile woman, whose only fault was to love me too well, too jealously, too exactingly, too insanely!” exclaimed De Crespigney, heaping up words as men will do under any strong excitement. “Yes, I killed my delicate, sensitive wife! I killed her with cruel, shameful, unmanly words. Oh, accursed VILLAIN!” he cried, smiting his forehead with a violent blow, as he strode up and down the room.

Dr. Prout went up to him, took his arm and drew it within his own, and saying, with the authority of a keeper over a madman:

“Come, De Crespigney, you must go with me. I am going to take you off to bed and give you an opiate. You, Laban, there! Lead the way to your master’s chamber.”

Marcel, whose stormy fits of emotion had reduced 70him to the weakness of infancy, submitted himself to be led from the room, preceded by his servant, Laban.

Then there was left in the apartment of death, with the corpse, the old watcher, Sophia, and the child, Gloria, who had sobbed herself to sleep with her head on the black woman’s lap.

A few minutes after the doctor had led De Crespigney away, however, Lamia softly entered the room and whispered:

“The hot water is ready, mammy.”

“Yes. Well, now take this child and carry her up to her room, and undress her without waking her, if possible, and put her to bed. But if she do wake, you stay with her till she goes to sleep again, an’ then you come down here an’ help me. You know what’s happened of by dis time, don’t you?”

“Oh, yes; mist’ess hab broken a blood-vessel, an’ ’deed——”

“Yes! Lord forgive me! I did fink by de way he ran on, as marster had done it hisself! I thanks my Lord it wasn’t him, and dere’ll be no crowner’s quest, nor hanging! Dere, gal, take de poor dear chile and carry her to bed. Well, poor mist’ess, I hopes de Lord will hab messy on her soul! Anyways, dere won’t be no more quarrellin’ an’ fightin’ an’ ’fendin’ an’ provin’ an’ ’spoundin’ an’ ’splainin’ in de house to drive a body ravin’, ’stracted mad. Marse ain’t ’clined to quarrel much hisself, an’ if he was, he couldn’t quarrel by hisself ’dout some one else to help him,” growled old ’Phia, as she lifted the child and laid her, still sleeping, in the arms of Lamia.

The girl took the exhausted child up to her room, 71undressed, and put her into bed without awakening her.

Once, indeed, the poor little creature half waked as she was finally laid on her pillow; but she only sobbed and swooned away to sleep.

Lamia stood by the bed watching her for a few minutes, and seeing that she was not likely to wake for hours to come, left the chamber and went down stairs to join her “mammy” in the room of death.

Together they washed and dressed the dead, and laid it out neatly on the long table to await the undertaker. Then ’Phia lighted a couple of wax candles and placed one at the head and one at the foot.

Lastly, the two set the room in perfect order, replenished the fire, and finally took up their positions, sitting one on the right, and the other on the left of the body, to watch until daylight.

Dr. Prout remained all night with his sorrowing friend, and then, after an early breakfast the next morning, departed to make, at the request of Colonel de Crespigney, the necessary arrangements for the funeral.

When Marcel de Crespigney re-entered the room of death he found it filled with an atmosphere of repose that calmed even his perturbed spirit. He went to the table and turned down the white linen cover, and saw the face of the dead soothed into a peaceful beauty such as it had never known in life. He gazed on it for some minutes, and then stooped and pressed his lips to the cold, quiet brow with more tenderness than he had ever kissed the living woman. Then he reverently covered the face again, and stole silently from the room.

Little Gloria slept the deep sleep of mental and 72physical prostration. She did not wake until noon. Then she awoke to memory, and to an agony of grief that refused to be comforted.

“And not a lady about de house to look arter de poor chile! Not eben a white ’oman anywhere in reach. An’ me an’ Lamia dat oberloaded with work, along ob dis drea’ful business!” groaned ’Phia, as she trotted from chamber to parlor, and from parlor to kitchen on her multifarious duties.

Even in the midst of her lamentations she met relief. In the kitchen she found David Lindsay and his grandmother, just arrived, and waiting to see if they could be of any use.

David, on coming to work that morning, had met Dr. Prout and had anxiously inquired if any one was sick at the “house,” and in answer had received the news of Madame de Crespigney’s death.

Then remembering the limited resources of service in that small and isolated household, David, with the thoughtfulness of a boy who had long had a man’s responsibilities on his own young shoulders, re-entered his boat and rowed rapidly across to the little sandy isle, to tell his grandmother, and even to suggest her returning with him.

The gentle old dame saw even more clearly than her grandson had done, the need they had of her at Promontory Hall. So she lost no time in getting ready to go, and in less than half an hour from the moment when she received the news, she stood in Sophia’s kitchen, earnestly offering her services.

“If you’ll only look after de chile, which I b’lieve you is a great favorite ’long o’ her, dat is all as I shall ax ob you,” said ’Phia.

And so the sweet old dame “looked after” little Gloria, and comforted her, night and day, during 73the three days that preparations for the funeral went on.

Meanwhile, David Lindsay made himself useful in many ways at the Hall during the day, and at night returned to the little isle to take care of the house in the absence of its mistress.

Often Gloria tried to see and console her stricken uncle; but he always refused to have her, saying:

“Let all innocent beings keep aloof from me.”

Thus, in alternations between the frenzy of remorse and the stupor of despair, Marcel de Crespigney passed the interval between the death and burial of his “murdered wife,” as, in his morbid self-reproach, he called her.

“Words kill!” he answered to the expostulations of his friend, the doctor. “Words kill, and I killed her with cruel words! The last words I spoke to her—the last words her failing senses heard from me—were cruel, murderous words! They killed her! What though no law can drag me before an earthly tribunal to answer for her life? Before the awful judgment seat of the God in my own soul, I stand a self-convicted murderer!”

The good doctor shrugged his shoulders, reflecting that it was of no use to argue with a man whose morbid sensibility made him, for the time being, a monomaniac.

Marcel de Crespigney, who had so greatly distinguished himself for martial courage and ability during the Mexican war, was weaker than a child where his sympathies were involved.

This weakness had betrayed him into all the misery of his life. It had drawn him, in his early youth, into a marriage with a plain, sickly, faded woman, who loved him with that morbid, exclusive, 74absorbing passion that, disappointed, sometimes sends its victim to the madhouse or the grave.

He had married her—let the truth be here told—from the promptings of compassion alone. He had given her all that he had to give—sympathy, tenderness, service. But this was not love—not the love she craved and missed. Hence came humiliation, morbid brooding, and the monomania that turned all his kindly acts and motives into outrage and offence.

Had children blessed their union, and so divided her thoughts and affections, or had they—the husband and wife—though childless, lived in a city, where society must have claimed some of her attention, and taught her something of life, she might have been much healthier in mind and body, and their marriage might have been happier.

But in the drear solitude of Promontory Hall, with no children to fondle, no society but that of the studious, intellectual man whom she vainly and madly loved, there could have been but one of two results for her—madness or death. The most merciful of the two was hers.

But it was also impossible that De Crespigney’s mind, under all these circumstances, should have retained its healthy tone, or that his long patience should not have at last become exhausted, so that in one moment of unexampled exasperation he lost the self-control of years and told her the truth—the truth, not “in love,” but in wrath and scorn, that had slain her.

Now he would not seek to palliate his fault or justify himself. He would not remember the jealousy, the violence, the acrimony with which she had driven him to frenzy; he would only remember 75her strong love for him and his secret indifference to her, and his deeply sympathetic, compassionate and conscientious spirit suffered pangs of remorse that would seem to others morbid, excessive and unjustifiable.

On the fifth day following the catastrophe, the remains of Eusebie de Crespigney were placed in an elegant rosewood casket and conveyed by boat to the little Gothic chapel on La Compte’s Landing, where they were met by a small number of old friends and neighbors, and where, after the religious services were over, they were consigned to the family vault under the chancel.

Immediately after the funeral, Marcel de Crespigney utterly broke down and fell ill of a brain fever.

Dr. Prout, taking authority on himself in the household anarchy, installed Mrs. Lindsay as nurse, and wrote to his family.

CHAPTER VI
MISS GRIP
She is active, stirring, all fire,
Cannot rest, cannot tire.
Browning.
Within ten days after the despatch of the doctor’s letter it was answered in person by the colonel’s maiden aunt, who, after many misadventures, reached Promontory Hall in the afternoon of a very bitter cold January day.

Miss Agrippina de Crespigney, called by her 76familiars Miss Grip, was a slight, wiry little woman, with a dark skin, sharp nose and chin, small, keen, brilliant black eyes, tightly curled, bright black hair, and a trim figure, clothed in a close black cashmere gown, with stiff white linen collar and cuffs—a tough little body she was, whose sixty years of life’s hard buffeting had not seemed to have saddened, weakened or in any other way aged, but rather matured, hardened and strengthened.

For now, in the very depth of one of the hardest winters that ever was known here, she had undertaken an arduous journey of more than twelve hundred miles, from the green savannahs of the “Sunny South” to the frozen regions of the icy North, traveling without rest, both day and night, by railroads, stage-coaches, and tavern hacks, and at length arrived at her destination, none the worse for her performance, without showing the slightest sign of suffering from cold or from fatigue.

The last half-day of her hard week’s journey had been peculiarly trying. She had reached St. Inigoes by stage-coach, early in the morning. After a hasty breakfast she had started in the springless carryall belonging to the inn, for the Promontory. When she reached the shore she had to wait hours there for the tide to ebb before she could cross over the neck of land that connected the island cape to the main.

Even then the passage was difficult and dangerous from the piled up blocks of ice that lay across the road.

“I really thought that I was coming to a habitable part of the globe, at least; but this is Nova Zembla! Just Nova Zembla and nothing else! A 77waste fragment of a continent, flung out as useless into an arctic sea!” said Miss Grip, as the old carriage pitched and tumbled along the narrow ice-encumbered isthmus towards the snow-clad promontory.

“I hab heern it called a many hard names, Miss, but I nebber heered it called Dissemblance afore,” replied the negro driver.

“Well, then, hold your tongue and mind your horses, or you’ll upset me,” rather irrelevantly concluded Miss Grip.

When the rickety carryall drew up before the old iron gate in the old stone wall that enclosed the stern-looking gray-stone house, Miss Grip gave voice once more.

“Is it a police-station, or a penitentiary, or a warehouse, or a fort, or something of the sort? This never was meant for a gentleman’s private residence.”

But she did not even wait to cross the threshold before she seized the reins of government. As soon as she alighted from the carryall she began to issue her orders to the driver.

“Take the carriage around to the stables—of course there are stables and you must find them—put up the carriage, feed and water the horses, then come around to the kitchen. You must get your supper before you go back. Stop! take my trunk off first and bring it up into the house.”

The driver began to obey these orders as the brisk little woman ran up the steps and sounded an alarm on the iron knocker.

Laban opened the door, and the driver carried in the trunk and put it down on the hall floor and departed about his other business.

78“How is your master?” sharply demanded Miss Grip of the astonished negro.

“Jes’ de same,” replied the man, as if the answer had been rapped out of him.

“How the same?”

“Onsensible.”

Miss Grip immediately took off her bonnet and shawl, and flung them on the hat-rack, saying:

“Show me the way up through this old jail to the den where your master lies.”

The man looked daggers at the insolent little woman, but he obeyed her, and led the way to the spacious upper chamber where the patient lay, watched by old Mrs. Lindsay and patient little Glo’.

Miss Agrippina nodded silently to the nurse, then kissed the child and sent her out of the room, saying that a sick room was no wholesome place for a little girl.

Now that Miss De Crespigney had come to take her proper place at the bedside of her suffering nephew, good Mrs. Lindsay found herself at liberty to return home and look after her own little affairs.

The child wept at parting with her old friend, and said:

“I know there is no work to do at the landing while all this snow and ice is piled up everywhere; but, oh, do please to send David Lindsay to see me sometimes. I shall be so lonesome when you are gone.”

The gentle old dame promised to do so, and went away to look for Laban to row her over to the little isle.

This though a very short, was not always a very safe trip, at this season of the year, when floating blocks of ice endangered the little boat, and it was 79only by watchfulness and skill that it was ever accomplished safely.

From that hour Miss Grip administered the government of Promontory Hall.

She was an accomplished nurse and housekeeper, and not at all an unkindly woman, notwithstanding her quick ways. She held a consultation with the doctor on his next visit, and learned from him the facts of the case, of which she would not inquire of the servants or even permit them to speak.

“It was the most unhappy marriage I ever heard of. But then I always knew Marcel would make a mess of it,” was her only comment on the story.

Then she devoted herself to her sick nephew, who, in his delirium, was always holding imaginary conversations with his lost wife, and sealing a reconciliation, such as in the past had always followed one of their quarrels.

Even Miss Grip would sometimes smile and sometimes weep to hear him say:

“I know it, my dear. I knew you did not mean all that you said. I knew you were excited. Yes, I know, for all that, you love me, Eusebie. There, say no more about it, dear. Let us try to forget it,” and so forth, for hours, until exhaustion and stupor would follow.

It was a long illness. The February thaw had come and melted the “iceberg,” as Miss Grip called the snow-clad promontory, before Marcel de Crespigney passed the crisis of his fever, and then he was so weak in mind as well as body that another month passed away before he had gradually recovered strength enough to sit up in his easy-chair and converse a little.

Next, when he was able to bear a sustained discourse, 80he gave Miss Grip his own version of the fatal quarrel that had precipitated the catastrophe, not sparing himself in the least, but heaping bitter reproaches upon his own head, as he had done from the first.

“Yet,” said Miss Agrippina, “I cannot see that you were so much to blame. But, in any case, it is of no use to look back. All that you can do now is to atone in the future for what you have done amiss in the past. She has left you no child of her own; but she has left a little niece whom she loved. Be a good father to that orphan.”

“I will do so,” answered De Crespigney, very meekly.

“And now, Marcel, take my advice: Whatever else you do, don’t make a fool of yourself again by getting married. Such a bookworm as you has no business with a wife. So, don’t be a fool.”

“I will not,” sighed the colonel, obediently.

When he grew stronger still he sent for the little portable cabinet in which his lost wife was accustomed to keep her papers, and he had it placed upon a stand between his easy-chair and the open wood fire, and he went through her letters, with the intention of burning all of them, lest they should by unforeseen accident fall into other hands.

And here he found what newly awoke his grief and his remorse. It was her last will, duly drawn up, signed, sealed, and witnessed, in which she bequeathed to him the whole of her real and personal estate. Folded in with this document was a letter, dated some time back, and addressed to her husband, to be opened after her death. It seemed to have been written just after one of their fierce quarrels and sorrowful reconciliations. In it she wrote:

81“I feel that some day I shall die suddenly in some one of my mad fits of excitement. I feel that when that shall have happened without time for reconciliation, I shall want to speak to you from the other life. I shall want to reach my hand across the great gulf that will divide us and be reconciled to you from the other life. But that may not be my privilege, so I write to you now, and leave with you, for that time, what I feel that I shall want to say to you then.”

And here followed a most pathetic plea for a charitable construction of her confessed infirmities of temper and a prayer for the merciful remembrance of her love. She said not one word about the will she had made securing all her property to him; she was silent on that subject, as if she thought it of little importance compared to the theme upon which she wrote, her own morbid, maddened affections.

The letter so agitated the convalescent that he suffered a relapse of several days’ duration.

As the spring advanced, however, he improved in health, strength and spirits. The season was early that year, so that by the middle of March every vestige of ice and snow had disappeared, and by the first of April the fields were green with grass and the trees blossoming for fruit. And then Marcel de Crespigney was able to sit out on the front porch and enjoy the resurrection of nature with a new sense of life.

Meanwhile the business on the fishing landing was opening briskly, and, among other workmen, David Lindsay found a plenty to do, patching boats and mending nets and clearing beaches.

82Again little Gloria went daily down to the old sea-wall and sat and read to her playmate while he mended old seines or netted new ones. She read to him the school histories of Rome, Greece and England, while the hungry mind of the boy swallowed and assimilated them all.

Under the shadow of the old sea-wall the life of the children was an idyl in Arcadie until one unhappy day, when their innocent affection fell under the notice of Miss Agrippina de Crespigney, and shocked that lady’s sense of propriety in the most outrageous manner.

She was giving the poor old manor house a fit of the severest hydrophobic convulsions, which she called a spring cleaning, turning every trunk, box, wardrobe, closet and store-room inside out, and raising dust that had rested undisturbed for ages, when, thinking that she needed more help, she determined to walk down to the landing, where, she was told, the fisher-boy was at work, and to send him to fetch his grandmother to her assistance. When she reached the old sea-wall and stood in the breach, this is what she saw before her:

A little fire kindled on the sands, and some fresh fish laid on the coals to broil; a little napkin spread on a flat stone, with two Little blue-edged plates and green-handled knives and forks, a bunch of radishes, a bunch of onions, and two rolls of wheat bread, and lastly, the two children sitting, side by side, in the old boat, reading from the same book.

Miss Agrippina raised up both her hands in speechless amazement. Then controlling herself, she forbore all reproaches to the little, unconscious offender, and only saying: “Gloria, my love, your 83uncle wants you. Go right home,” came calmly down to the scene.

Quite innocent of any impropriety, the little girl rose obediently, and saying:

“I am sorry, David Lindsay, that I cannot stay and take dinner with you to-day; but poor uncle, you know! I must go to him directly; you must take the book along with you and read it at home to-night,” she ran lightly along, tripped over the broken wall, and home.

Miss Agrippina turned to dispatch the boy on his errand after his grandmother.

David promptly left his culinary preparations, unmoored his boat, and rowed rapidly for the isle.

And so the children’s little, innocent al fresco feast was spoiled; but that was nothing to what happened afterwards.

CHAPTER VII
CHANGES
All she did was but to wear out the day;
Full oftentimes she leave of him did take;
And oft again devised somewhat to say,
Which she forgot, whereby excuse to make;
So loth was she his company to forsake.
Spenser.
Miss Agrippina de Crespigney stood in the breach of the old stone sea-wall, watching David Lindsay as he rowed rapidly from the shore.

“This intimacy must be stopped at once,” she 84said; “that poor, neglected child must be looked after and not allowed to associate with every rude boor that she may happen to meet on this dreary promontory! She must be sent to school. I will speak to Colonel de Crespigney on the subject at once.”

So muttering, Miss Grip turned, clambered down from her standpoint and walked rapidly towards the house.

When she got there she found little Glo’ standing between her uncle’s knees, as he reclined in his chip-bottomed arm-chair in the front porch.

“Why, how is this, Aunt Agrippina? This child says you told her I sent for her. It was surely a mistake. I never sent for her,” said Colonel de Crespigney, as soon as he saw Miss Grip.

“No one said you did. I told her you wanted her, and so you do want her, or at least you ought to,” grimly replied the lady.

“Why, what on earth do you mean, Miss de Crespigney?”

“You know very well what I mean, or you should know,” severely retorted Miss Grip.

“Upon my sacred word of honor, I don’t! Pray explain yourself,” entreated the colonel.

Instead of replying to him, Miss Agrippina deliberately divested herself of her bonnet and shawl and gave them to the child, saying:

“Here, my dear, take these up into my room and put them away carefully.”

“Now, then, what do you mean?” demanded the colonel, when the little girl had disappeared into the house.

“I mean that you want your ward to stay at home 85until she goes to school, which she must do very soon,” said Miss Grip, decidedly.

“Go to school? How can she? There is no school fit for her within fifty miles of this place.”

“Certainly not. She must be sent away to a first-class boarding-school.”

“I cannot consent to that, Aunt Agrippina. I cannot, and will not. I cannot part with her. Besides, it would break her heart to send her away.”

“Fiddle!” said Miss Grip.

“Yet I see that she should have instruction. I will advertise for a first-class resident governess.”

“You will not do any such thing, Colonel Marcellus de Crespigney! A resident governess in the house, indeed! Why, she would marry you in six months!”

“Absurd!” indignantly exclaimed the colonel.

“Oh, yes, you may call it ‘absurd,’ if you like! But I know you, Marcellus! Any needy woman, any single woman, I mean, young or old, plain or pretty, shut up in the same house with you, would marry you out of hand!”

“You must think me a very weak man,” said the colonel.

“I do,” said Miss Grip.

“Thank you,” said De Crespigney, with an air of chagrin.

“Weak where your sympathies are concerned, Marcel, and that is no discredit to you, my dear! But I’ll not have any wandering woman making her market at your expense! No, sir! no resident governess, if you please!”

“I hope, Aunt Agrippina, you will permit me to be master of my own house, so far as to say who shall or shall not make a part of my family.”

86“Oh, by all means, and take the consequences, too, for if you engage a resident governess, I shall leave the house. And after I go what respectable woman, do you suppose, would come and live here with a young widower, and no lady of his family to keep her in countenance? Ah, ha! I have you there, Marcel! Yes, and I mean to keep you there!”

“It is rather unkind of you, Aunt Agrippina; but I shall not argue the point, since I know from experience that nothing ever turned you from any resolution that you had formed. Still, I say, it is very unkind of you,” said the colonel, with a wounded air.

“It is for your own good, honey. If I were to stay here and let a resident governess come, she would make you the captive of her bow and spear, and marry you right under my very nose! It will not do, Marcel. The child must be sent to school.”

“But she is so young yet. Not nine years old until June. You or I can direct her studies for the next year or two.”

“I don’t see it. Besides, who is to look after her out of school hours? I tell you, Marcel, it is not only for her education that she is to be sent from home.”

“For what other reason, I pray you?”

“To keep her out of bad company.”

“‘Bad company?’ Bad company, in this remote, isolated place?” exclaimed the colonel, gazing at the lady in surprise.

“Yes! bad company, I say! the very worst company! I think it is a shame, a burning and a crying shame,” exclaimed Miss Grip, firing up at the sound of her own words—“a burning and a crying shame that she, Maria da Gloria de la Vera, a Countess of 87Portugal by birth, should be left here to run wild like any little savage, with no better companion than a low-born, ignorant fisher-boy! There!”

“Lord—bless—my—soul—alive!” cried the colonel, sarcastically.

“Where do you suppose I found them?” sharply demanded Miss Grip, whose temper was rising.

“Found—whom?” coolly inquired the colonel.

“Your niece and ward, the Countess Maria, and your hired servant, David, the fisher-boy.”

“I wish you would not be ridiculous, my dear aunt. What good does that title do our poor little girl, here in democratic America? Why, even her father, a Portuguese nobleman by birth, but a staunch republican in principle, dropped his title when he transferred his interests to the United States,” said Marcel.

“Then he had no right to do it, and his act is of no consequence to his daughter. She is the Countess de la Vera, and she would be recognized as such in any other civilized country except in democratic America, as you call it. But that is not the point.”

“What is the point, then?”

“I asked you just now, where you supposed I found them?”

“In a boat, on the water?”

“No; sitting on an old, overturned boat under the broken sea-wall, side by side, with an open book before them, both their hands on the covers, both faces bent over the same page.”

“God bless the child! She was trying to teach the lad!” ejaculated Marcel, with a smile of sympathetic pleasure in his eyes.

“I say it is most improper! most indecorous! most objectionable! for the little Countess Maria 88to be sitting down on an old boat side by side with a low, vulgar, ill-bred fisher-boy!” exclaimed Miss Grip.

“Stop, stop, my dear lady! You go too far, indeed! David Lindsay is a poor fisher lad, certainly; but he is not, in any sense of the words, low, vulgar, or ill-bred.”

“Now, how can he be anything else?”

“By intuition. He has the intuitions of a little gentleman.”

“And now, since you talk like that, I am more determined than ever that the child shall go to school,” said Miss Grip.

“It is of no earthly use for you to persist in saying so, Aunt Agrippina. I cannot part with little Glo’. She is the sunshine of my home—the light of my life! Besides, she loves me so that she could not bear to leave me. The separation would grieve her to death.”

“Fiddle!” scornfully repeated Miss Grip.

The reappearance of little Glo’ interrupted the conversation, and the subject was dropped for the time being.

There is an Indian song which teaches a good lesson in perseverance:

“If a man talk a very long time,
If a man talk a very long time,
If a man talk a very long time,
He will bore a hole through a rock.”
And if a woman so talk, the effect is surer as well as swifter.

At the very first opportunity Miss Agrippina de 89Crespigney resumed the subject of sending her niece to school, and she talked a “very long time.”

Again and again she returned to the theme, and longer and longer she talked. She would listen to no proposal of home teaching. She would come to no compromise whatever. She would send the little “countess” to a first-class French and English Ladies’ Academy.

But it was not until late in the summer that Colonel de Crespigney, worn out with importunity and convinced, though against his will, by argument, reluctantly consented to the plan.

Miss Agrippina acted promptly on his decision, lest it should be repented of and withdrawn.

“This is Friday, the 14th of August,” she said. “I will myself leave here with the child on Monday, the 17th. We will go to Baltimore and stop at some good family boarding-house. Then I will go to the Academy of the Sacred Heart, and make an engagement to enter her on the reopening of the school exercises on the first of September, get a list of the articles required for her school uniform and outfit, have them purchased and made up in the interval, enter my little lady on the opening day, and come home. All this will take me about a fortnight, I suppose,” said Miss Grip.

And the same day she packed up a few changes of clothes for herself and her niece, and then communicated to the child that she was to go to school on the following Monday.

Her words conveyed but a tithe of the truth to the inexperienced little girl, who forthwith went to her “dee-ar Marcel” for further information.

She found him in his favorite seat—the old chip-bottomed arm-chair, on the front porch.

90“Am I really going away from you to school, uncle dee-ar?” she inquired, seating herself on his knees and putting her arms around his neck.

“Yes, my darling. You are a little lady, and must be educated, cultivated, refined, accomplished. And so you must go to school,” replied “Marcel,” laying her tender cheek against his hirsute face.

“But I don’t want to be all that, uncle. I want to stay with you always, and play with David Lindsay.”

Marcel caressed her tenderly, and explained gently the absolute necessity of her submission to the social law that required her to be educated.

“Won’t you be lonesome without your little Glo’, Marcel, dee-ar!”

“Very lonesome indeed, my child.”

“And won’t you be very sorry?” she asked, smoothing his hair with her small hand.

“No, not very sorry, darling. I shall be glad because it will be for your good,” said De Crespigney, trying to look as if he meant what he said.

“You have got Aunty Agrippina and your books and your music to keep you company. But David Lindsay! Oh, Marcel, David Lindsay!” said the child, as the tears filled her eyes.

“What of him, my pet?” asked the colonel very gravely.

“Oh, he has got nobody but me, and no music nor books but what I bring him. Oh, poor David Lindsay! What will he do?” sighed Glo’.

“He will do very well, my dear. He will be busy with his fishing.”

“But he can’t be always fishing! And he will have nobody to play with, or to read with, or to bring him books, or—oh, dear! what shall we do? 91Oh, I can’t go to school, Marcel! I can’t! How can I go and leave you and David Lindsay?” broke forth the child, in a wail of distress.

“I and David Lindsay must try and console each other, in our little lady’s absence, with the thought that it is all for her good that she has gone. We shall do very well,” said the colonel, more gravely and tenderly than he had yet spoken.

“Oh, will you? Will you? Will you comfort David Lindsay? Will you lend him some books? Oh, he is so hungry for books, uncle dee-ar. I am going to give him all mine before I go away; but mine are only a few, and he will soon read them all. Will you lend him some? Will you, Marcel, dee-ar?”

“Yes, darling, I will indeed. I will, my precious. I will charge myself with the welfare of your little friend, and he shall not want books, nor advice, nor anything that he may require, if he wishes to cultivate his mind,” said Marcel de Crespigney, who was absolutely without any prejudices of rank.

“And oh! will you love David Lindsay, and let him love you, like I do?”

“Like you do? What do you mean, my child?”

“Like I love you! Will you love him and let him love you, like I love you?” she pleaded, laying her soft cheek against his face—a frequent caress of hers.

He kissed her for all reply.

It was too late that Friday evening to see her playmate. She had been reading with him all that afternoon, and had taken leave of him before she knew that she was to go to school. Now she felt sure that he had gone home, and she should not 92have a chance to see him and tell him until the next day.

Still, she was thinking more of her playmate than of any one else, simply because he had more need of her than any one else. So she went up to her little bookcase and took down all her books and packed them in a trunk that would hold about twenty-five or thirty miscellaneous volumes, comprising nearly all of Peter Parley’s and other juvenile works, that were held in great favor at that time. With these she put in two slates, a dozen graded copy-books, pens, pencils, india-rubber, blotting-papers, inkstand, and every requisite of the school-desk that she could find.

Then she locked it and called up old Laban, and said to him:

“I want you to shoulder this and take it down to the boat-house for me.”

The old servant looked at the trunk and looked at the child, scratched his head, and declared:

“I don’t know what you mean, Miss Glo’.”

The little creature was not disposed to take airs on herself; so she kindly explained to the old man what she intended to do with the trunk, adding truthfully:

“I told Uncle Marcel, and he did not object.”

Old Laban then shouldered the trunk and followed his little mistress down the stairs, out of the front door, and so down to the end of the promontory, through the breach in the old sea-wall, and finally to a dilapidated little boat-house, where she directed him to place it.

“It will be safe there until the morning and then I can give it to David Lindsay, and he can carry it away in his boat.”

93The sun had set half an hour before, and it was growing dark, so little Glo’ and her sable companion hurried from the shore back to the house.

“Saturday and Sunday! I have only got two days to be with Uncle Marcel and David Lindsay,” said little Glo’ to herself when she awoke the next morning.

And to make the most of her time, she hurried out of bed, dressed herself quickly, and ran down stairs.

Her aunt and uncle had not yet appeared, so she said to the cook:

“Just give me a cup of milk and a biscuit,’Phia, and I will eat my breakfast and go. It is my last day but one at home, and I must make the most of it.”

The old woman complied with her request, and the little girl quickly dispatched her meal, snatched her straw hat from the rack in the hall, and ran out of the house and down to the beach.

She stood in the breach of the broken wall and looked all around for her playmate, but did not see him, and she thought she was going to be disappointed; but just then she heard the sound of a hammer, and knew it must come from one held in his hand, for there was no one else who worked on the beach.

She ran down and found him nailing loose boards on the old boat-house.

“Oh! David Lindsay,” she exclaimed, as soon as she saw him, “I have got something to tell you! What do you think it is? Oh, you would never guess! I am going away on Monday!”

“Oh! NO!” cried the boy, while a look of blank consternation came over his face.

94“Indeed, I am! I don’t want to go; but they say I must, David Lindsay.”

“Oh! where are you going?” he asked, in a great trouble, that he never dreamed of trying to hide.

“To a boarding-school in Baltimore. Oh! I don’t want to go, David Lindsay! But they say I must!” cried the child, almost in tears again.

The lad sighed, looked thoughtful, and then said:

“Yes; I know. Even grandmother has said often: ‘Why don’t they send that little lady to school? She ought to be at school.’ So I suppose you must go, sure enough, and it is all right; but it is very har—hard!” said the boy, valiantly trying to suppress a sob, and succeeding in doing so.

“Yes, it is hard; but Uncle Marcel says that he and you must console each other; and he says he will lend you books and give you advice, and help you, if you wish, to improve your mind, David Lindsay. And here, come in here, and see what I have got for you! I told uncle I was going to give them to you, and he did not object. And old Laban brought them down here for me yesterday. Come and see,” she said, as she led the way into the old boat-house and pointed to the trunk.

“Oh!” exclaimed the boy. “Books?”

“Yes! Drag the trunk out into the light where I can show it to you, David Lindsay.”

The boy obeyed.

The girl then unlocked the trunk and gleefully displayed its contents, looking up into the boy’s face with eyes dancing with the delight of delighting. Indeed, his eyes, radiant with rapture, responded fully.

“Oh! oh! what heaps of books and things!” he cried.

95“They are all, all yours, David Lindsay!”

“Oh! oh! how generous you are! And—oh! how happy you must be!” he exclaimed, fairly catching his breath in ecstasy.

“Indeed I am very, very happy, David Lindsay!” she cried.

And so she was at that moment, while looking on her playmate’s happiness, and forgetting that she had to leave him soon and go away from home.

And then both went to work and tumbled out all the slates, pencils, and pens, all the “Peter Parleys,” and other attractive school books.

Finally, at the bottom of the trunk, lay two thick volumes, which little Glo’ with some difficulty lifted out and took upon her lap, and playfully hid with her handkerchief, saying:

“And now, David Lindsay, here are two precious, precious treasures, too precious to be read very often!”

“What is it?” said the boy—“the Holy Bible in two volumes?”

“No,” answered the girl, gravely and sweetly. “The Word of the Lord is the Book of books, and not to be talked of with others.”

“Well, then, is it the Lives of the Saints?”

“No,” she answered, smiling; “but you can never guess. This one in blue and gold is the ‘Arabian Nights’ Entertainment,’ and this one in crimson, with the painted picture on the cover, is ‘Fairy Tales.’ Oh! they are just splendid, David Lindsay! I love them, and so will you; but you ought not to read them until you have done all your work and lessons for the day. Mamma never let me have the story-books until I had done my lessons,” said the little girl, solemnly.

96Meanwhile David was looking at the new books.

“I—I like these a heap better than I do the school ones,” he said, as he turned over the pages.

“Oh, to be sure! So do I. But they are only holiday books, you know.”

“Yes, these are only holidays, and these are working hours,” said the boy, with a sigh and a smile, as he began to replace the volumes in the bottom of the trunk.

“I will put them all back again, if you want to go to work, David Lindsay,” she said, as she joined him in the task that soon, at her word, he left her to complete. Then the sound of his hammer kept time to her hands as they quickly stowed away the treasures in the trunk.

Presently the boy stopped hammering and came to speak to her again.

“You are so good to me. You do so much for me, and I do not do any for you. I have not found out what to do for you! Oh, could you tell me what I could do for you?”

She opened her blue eyes wide with astonishment pure and simple.

“Why, why, you are always doing ever so much to please me!” she said.

“Now what? Do just tell me what?” he asked.

She paused in thought so long that he asked again, earnestly:

“What do I do to please you?”

“Oh, I don’t know just what in particular, but you do everything every day, all the time! Why, David Lindsay, if you was to go to heaven and leave me behind, I should just cry my eyes out! Yes, I should just sit down on the old boat here and cry my eyes out!” And moved by the picture 97her imagination had drawn, she might have given him a practical illustration, if he had not quickly responded:

“But I am not going to heaven to leave you behind! All we Lindsay fishermen live to be old men of eighty or ninety, if we don’t get drowned, you know! Though indeed, for the matter of that, we mostly do get drowned,” he added, in a lower tone.

But she heard him, and quickly cried:

“Oh! Don’t you go and get drowned, please don’t, David Lindsay!”

“Indeed, I don’t mean to!” said the boy, as he went back to his hammering.

At that moment the colored girl, Lamia, appeared in the breach of the wall, calling for Miss Gloria.

The child stood up, and answered:

“Here I am. Who wants me?”

“Your aunt! Leastways, your uncle’s aunt—Miss Aggravatin Discrepancy,” said Lamia.

(That was what the negroes, with their usual blundering manner, made out of the lady’s classic and elegant maiden name.)

“What does my aunt want with me, Lamia?” inquired the child, with a troubled look.

“To try on yer travelin’ dress, which me an’ Miss Aggravatin has been a rippin’ up of one of her own old allypackers to make over for you, an’ a cuttin’ an’ a bastin’ of it all de whole mornin’. Come along, chile, ’cause it’s got to be finished to-night, ef we sets up workin’ on it till to-morrow mornin’.”

“I must go, David Lindsay. I must go. But I will come back as soon as ever I can get away. And oh, won’t you please try to get through your work so as to take time to row me over to Sandy Hill to take leave of dee-ar Granny Lindsay? Oh, 98indeed I must go and take leave of dee-ar Granny Lindsay!” said little Glo’, looking earnestly in the face of her playmate.

“I will work fast and get through all I have to do. I won’t stop for dinner, but will work through the noon hour, and then I can get done by four o’clock and be ready for you,” replied the boy.

Little Glo’ ran home so as to get through the “trying on” as soon as possible.

She found her aunt too busy to question her as to where she had been.

Miss Agrippina did not detain her long, but as soon as the waist of the dress was fitted, and the length of the sleeves and skirt measured, she dismissed the child.

Full of a new idea, little Glo’ ran to seek her uncle.

She found Colonel de Crespigney in the library, seated before the old organ, drawing weird music from its worn-out keys.

“Marcel, dee-ar, I have only got a day and a half now! Won’t you please let David Lindsay off from his work, so he can take me in the row-boat over to bid good-by to Granny Lindsay? Oh, I must say good-by to dee-ar Granny Lindsay before I go,” she pleaded, laying her tender cheek against his face.

“Yes, love,” answered the gentle young uncle. “Yes, you shall have your little will while you stay here. Go and tell the lad to leave off work at once and row you over to the island.”

She kissed him in warm gratitude and sped away to the landing, where she found her playmate still at work.

She told him her joyful news, exclaiming gleefully:

99“We shall have a whole half-day holiday, for it is only just twelve o’clock, David Lindsay! We shall have, oh, such a happy, happy half-day!”

The boy quickly stopped his work and got his boat ready.

Then the children lifted the trunk of books between them and placed it in the skiff. Lastly they entered and seated themselves, and David took up the oars and rowed for the isle.

They found the old dame busily engaged in preparing her frugal early dinner of tea and bread and butter, with fried fish, boiled eggs, and peaches and milk.

She gave the little lady a warm welcome and divested her of her hat and mantle. And while Gloria explained that her uncle had given David Lindsay a half holiday, the dame added two more cups and saucers and teaspoons and two more plates and pairs of knives and forks to the table and put a few more eggs on to boil.

“I am going to school on Monday, Granny Lindsay, and I have come to take leave of you,” said little Glo’, when she took the seat that David had placed for her.

“Have ’ee, darling? I’m glad to see ’ee, and main glad to hear ’ee’s going to school,” cordially replied the dame.

“I don’t want to go, Granny Lindsay! I don’t want to leave you all,” sighed the child.

“But ’ee ought to, darling. ’Ee’s a little lady, and ’ee ought to be trained up as such.”

“But I don’t want to be, Granny Lindsay! I want to stay home with dee-ar Marcel and you and David Lindsay!” sadly persisted the child.

100“’Ee must subject ’eeself to ’ee pastors and masters, little lady. They do all for ’ee own good.”

“Aunt Agrippina says that I am a countess, Granny Lindsay; but I know I am not. I am worse at counting than at anything else. I never could learn the multiplication table,” said the child, with a look of perplexity and vexation.

“So much the more reason for ’ee to go to school, my little lady! Now sit ’ee up to table and have some dinner.”

Little Glo’ soon forgot her trouble in the society of Granny Lindsay and David.

She passed a “happy, happy half day,” then, with many kisses, took a loving leave of her old friend, and returned home in charge of the fisher lad.

It was sunset when they landed on the promontory beach.

“To-morrow is Sunday. Uncle and aunt and I will go to church at La Compte’s Landing. But after church we shall come directly home. Will you come in the afternoon to bid me a last good-by before I go? You know we are to start before day on Monday, so as to catch the St. Inigoes stage-coach,” said little Glo’, as she was about to take leave of her friend.

“Yes, indeed. I am going to church at St. Inigoes, but I will go to early mass, so as to be back in time to come here in the afternoon,” replied the boy.

“So do! Good-night, David Lindsay!”

“Good-night!”

“God bless you, David Lindsay!”

“And you, too!”

She sped away towards the house, not singing 101and dancing as had been her custom. Her little loving heart was too heavy with the thought of parting with her friends.

The next day she went with her uncle and aunt to morning service at La Compte’s Landing, returned with them to a early dinner, and then went down to the beach to bid a last good-by to her friend and playmate.

He was waiting for her with a box of fine shells in his hand.

“These are some that grandfather brought home from the Indian Ocean. Granny has kept them for a long time; but she wants you to have them now,” he said, rising and offering the box.

“Oh, how beautiful!” she exclaimed, sitting down with the box on her lap, and beginning to examine them. “So many different colors! so many different shapes and sizes! Not two alike!”

“People can make pretty boxes and vases out of them, granny says. Make the boxes and things out of pasteboard, you know, and stick the shells on them with glue,” said the boy, as he stood looking down on her, pleased that she was pleased with his humble offering.

“Oh, but I think it would spoil the pretty shells to fix them on to anything! I like them to be free, so I can pour them from one hand to the other, and turn them over! Oh, David Lindsay, I am so glad to have them! And so glad you gave them to me, too!”

“Granny gave them to me to give to you.”

“Well, it is all the same, David Lindsay. And I will take the pretty little things to school with me, and look at them every day, and keep them forever 102and ever. Sit down by me and let us look at the little beauties together. You know that this is our last day.”

The boy obeyed her.

She said it was their “last day;” and that day was drawing rapidly to a close. The children knew that they were going to part, but they scarcely knew yet what the parting was to be to them; they had had no experience in separation; and both wondered a little in secret why they felt no more pain at the immediate prospect of losing each other.

When the sun set, which was always the signal for their daily good-night, little Gloria shut up her box of shells and arose, saying:

“I must go now. Good-by, David Lindsay.”

“Good-by.”

“God bless you, David Lindsay!”

“And you too!”

Now, according to custom, she should have run home; but she lingered, loth to leave the spot.

“You know we are going to start long before daylight to-morrow morning,” she said.

“I—know it!” he gasped with a great sob.

“Oh! David Lindsay, don’t cry!” she wailed, with the tears rushing to her eyes.

“I’m not crying. It’s a lump in my throat,” said the poor boy.

“Oh, dear! Oh, dear! What shall I do? I don’t want to go to school! I don’t want to be a lady! I don’t! I don’t! And poor Marcel don’t want me to go, neither!” wept the child.

“And no more do I!” cried the boy, struggling with the “lump in his throat.”

“Don’t cry, David Lindsay. Oh! please don’t cry!”

103“I’m not crying a bit! But I don’t want you to go away,” sobbed the lad.

“Nobody does, but Aunt Grip. It is all Aunt Grip! Oh! I wish she had never come near the place! We were all so happy until she came! And she says it is all for my own good. And I think that is too bad!”

Little Glo’s last words awoke the better spirit of the boy.

He sobbed and sighed, and then set himself to comfort the little lady.

“She means it for your good. Even granny says you ought to go to school. And so I know it must be all right for you to go. And you will come back again, and be able to tell me lots of things.”

“Oh, yes, indeed; I will come back for the Christmas holidays, you know. And oh! David Lindsay, every time I write to dee-ar Marcel I will send a message to you. And will you send one back to me, too?”

“If the master will let me.”

“Why, of course he will let you! Dee-ar Marcel is too tender-hearted to refuse. Let me tell you something. Aunt Grip, ever since she has been here, has been trying to prevent me from coming out here and playing with you, and if it had not been for dee-ar Marcel, she would have prevented me; but Marcel would not let me be grieved that much.”

The twilight was fading so fast that the child looked up to the sky in alarm, exclaiming:

“Oh! I must go! I must go! Good-by, dee-ar David Lindsay!”

104“I must walk with you up to the house. It is too dark for you to go by yourself,” said the boy, rising to accompany her.

He helped her over the rough stones of the broken sea-wall, and then walked with her until they reached the porch and found Colonel de Crespigney and Miss Agrippina sitting out there to enjoy the delicious coolness of the August evening.

Then the boy paused and lifted his torn straw hat, and said:

“Good-night.”

“Good-night. God bless you, dee-ar David Lindsay.”

“And you too!”

So the children parted, to meet no more for years to come.

That night David Lindsay, being a boy, and therefore ashamed of his tears, cried “all alone by himself” in the little loft of his island cot.

That night, little Glo’, being a girl, sobbed herself to sleep on the sympathetic bosom of her “dee-ar Marcel.”

Long before light the next morning she took tearful leave of her uncle and her humble colored friends, and started in the custody of Miss Grip for the distant city where she was to spend her school days.

Before the end of the month she was duly entered as a resident pupil in the Academy of the Sacred Heart Convent. And Miss Agrippina de Crespigney returned to Promontory Hall to keep house for her nephew, well satisfied.

105
CHAPTER VIII
AFTER SEVEN YEARS
Out of the convent came the maid.
Robert Browning.
We have lingered so long over the lovely childhood of little Glo’ that we have no time to give to her school days.

In entering her at the “Sacret Heart,” Miss Agrippina had enrolled her as the “Countess Maria da Gloria de la Vera,” and had provided her with as rich and costly an outfit as the rigid rules of the academy would permit. She had also furnished her with a plenty of pocket-money.

All this had given the simple-hearted, humble-minded little Glo’ a grand rank among her untitled and less wealthy school-mates, who did all they possibly could do to transform her from a meek and lovely child to a proud and supercilious young lady.

Poor David Lindsay did not realize the loss of little Glo’ until she had really gone. Then he “sorrowed without hope.” It is true that he believed she would return at Christmas; but that was four long months off.

From the fourth day of her departure he began to watch for the return of old Laban from his Tuesday’s and Friday’s trips to St. Inigoes’ Post-office, and on his appearance would call out:

“Any letters, Uncle Laban?”

The answers were always:

106“Yes.”

Then, after the decent delay of an hour, the poor boy would go up to the house and bashfully ask for the colonel, and when admitted to his presence stand respectfully, cap in hand, and inquire:

“If you please, sir, have you heard from——”

“Miss de la Vera?”

“Yes, sir, please.”

“I have. She is well, and sends her kind remembrance to you,” would Colonel de Crespigney reply.

(Now this was not at all what little Glo’ sent. She sent her “love to dear David Lindsay.” But Colonel de Crespigney exercised the guardian’s prudence and privilege in translating the message sent through him.)

On hearing this, the boy would twist his little torn hat in his hand and say, timidly, hesitatingly:

“If you please, sir, when you write—would you please to say I thank her very much for thinking of me, and I send her my——”

“Respects.”

“Yes, sir, please.” (Now this was not at all what the poor boy meant to say; for he really wished to send his “best love to her.”)

The parted children had no true interpreter, so no wonder a gulf opened and widened between them. But Marcel meant well; and David Lindsay was destined to have his turn, when, driven by the very outrage and stress of fate, the lovely heiress should lay her hand and fortune at the feet of the poor fisherman and implore him to take them up.

She did not come home for the happy Christmas holidays. Miss Agrippina represented to her brother that to bring the “Countess Maria” back 107to the promontory would be to have all the trouble of parting to go through again; that therefore she had best be left to spend her holidays at the school where she was receiving her education.

The gentle colonel, through indolence and good nature, had fallen more and more under the dominion of his maiden aunt, and therefore consented to all her plans.

So little Glo’ did not come home for her Christmas holidays. But her young uncle, who had not ceased to mourn in secret the absence of his pet, aroused himself from his lethargy, and went to the city, and took his niece from her prison, and spent the Christmas holidays with her at a fashionable hotel, taking her every evening to some place of refined amusement, and so devoting himself to her pleasure that the little rustic had reason to believe that, after all said, the city was the true Arcadia, and life, as “dee-ar Marcel” made it for her, a lovely fairy tale.

But in all the delights of her new vista of life, she did not yet forget her childhood’s playmate, and amid her many questions about “them all at home,” she did not fail to inquire about “dee-ar David Lindsay.”

Her guardian replied that the boy was well and doing well, but had not come to borrow any books yet, and, perhaps, was not so much interested in improving his mind as she had supposed. Boys of his class were not likely to be so.

“But, Marcel, you must interest yourself in him, and not let his interest in his books flag. That was not what I expected of you, Marcel!” said his little monitress, reproachfully.

108“I will do better when I return, my darling,” replied her penitent.

“Mind you do, Marcel! He has no father, no guardian even, and who will look after my David Lindsay now I am away, if you do not?”

On the Monday after Twelfth Day he replaced the little student in her school and returned to his own dreary home and musty books.

He corresponded with her regularly through the winter and spring and the early summer; and noted the great improvement she was making.

There was one thing, however, that very much annoyed him in her letters. She always sent her “love to dear David Lindsay.” But he took care to translate this into “kind remembrance,” and to send back David’s “respects.” So the gulf widened and widened between the hearts of the children.

But David’s time was yet to come.

Then, on the first of July, when the midsummer holidays were about to commence, he went to the city again, took his child out from her prison and carried her off to the Greenbriar White Sulphur Springs to give her a glimpse of the glorious mountain scenery, and an insight into the great world of society. Here the handsome young widower, the heroic young officer, with the laurels won in Mexico yet green in the memories of all, might have become the hero of the season; but nothing could win him away from his “child.” He rode and drove with her through the wild and beautiful forest and mountain scenery. He read with her, sang duets with her, played ten-pins with her, and generally “made a fool of himself about her,” as more than one aggravated matron with marriageable 109daughters declared. In September he took his child back to her school just a year older, and several years more experienced than she had been when she first entered the institution.

And now he had reason to congratulate himself on one thing. His ward’s interest in the poor fisher-boy was evidently dying out, as he had first said it would. It was well enough that they should have played together as little children, and he had not therefore interfered to prevent them. He was too tender-hearted indeed to have given them so much pain. But now, at last, it was all ended, as it should be.

The first year was a type of all that followed while she remained at the “Sacred Heart.” Every Christmas her young uncle would go and take her from the school and spend the holidays with her at a hotel, taking her to places of amusement suitable to her age; and at the end of the holidays replacing her at school and returning to his own home.

Every June he would go and take her for the midsummer vacation, and travel with her to some delightful summer resort among the mountains, or on the lake shores, returning her to her convent early in September, and then repairing to his own estate.

Sometimes his mother would write and ask him to bring his young ward and join her circle at Newport, or Niagara, or wherever they might have decided to spend their summer season.

But Colonel de Crespigney always found some good excuse for politely declining the invitation.

The very truth was that Marcel preferred to have his little Glo’ all to himself during these long midsummer vacations.

110Her vivid and deep delight in all the sublime and beautiful in nature and in art, rekindled his own smouldering enthusiasm and revived his fading youth.

Thus, through her, he enjoyed life anew. Now his time was divided like the Arctic year—into long darkness and long light. The time spent in his gloomy “penitentiary” on the promontory, was his Arctic night; the time passed in wandering and sight-seeing with his brilliant and ardent little traveling companion, was his Arctic day.

David Lindsay, chilled by the cold “remembrances,” that grew cold only in the refrigerator of Marcel’s translations, gradually ceased to inquire after Miss de la Vera, or send his “respects” to her.

And so the great gulf between the young souls seemed impassable, until one desperate leap in the dark cleared it.

Meanwhile the years rolled rapidly onward; his child was growing up, and he himself was growing—middle-aged.

The last time he took her out to spend her midsummer vacation in traveling with him through a succession of beautiful summer resorts, he was thirty-five years old, with perhaps a dozen silver threads scattered over his fine head, but glistening with terrible conspicuousness amid the jetty blackness of his hair. She was just fifteen, tall and well-developed for her years, a radiant blonde, with a delicate Grecian profile, fair, clear transparent complexion, large, soft, dark blue eyes, veiled by dark eyelashes, and arched by dark eyebrows, and 111with an aureole of lightly flowing, pale, golden-hued hair.

Marcel had not seen her since the preceding Christmas holidays, a period of nearly seven months, during which she had bloomed from the bud to the half-opened rose of womanhood.

He looked at her with surprised and delighted admiration. He said nothing on the subject, expressed no opinion, paid no compliment—only he refused more emphatically than ever his mother’s invitation to bring his niece and join her party at Cacouna, Canada; and he resolved, more firmly than ever, to keep his lovely ward to himself.

Indeed, little Gloria desired nothing better. She loved her young uncle with all the devotion of a grateful, loyal, fervent heart, and was perfectly satisfied with his companionship, and only his, in all their summer wanderings and sojournings. She had no one else to love, poor child; her Aunt Agrippina she had only feared; and her childhood’s playmate, David Lindsay, she only remembered tenderly, like one lost long ago, or like the dead. Marcel was all in all to her.

On this last occasion of which I speak, when Colonel de Crespigney, first seeing his young ward after a seven months’ absence, was startled into surprise and admiration at the discovery that the pretty child had bloomed into the beautiful girl, he resolved that this should be her last year at school; that whether she should graduate or not graduate at the next annual commencement, he should withdraw her from the Sacred Heart Academy and bring her home “for good.”

And then?

Marcel kept his future plans to himself.

112
CHAPTER IX
DUMB LOVE
His heart
Had far outgrown his years, and to his eye
There was but one beloved face on earth,
That ever shone upon him. He had looked
Upon it till it would not pass away,
But she in these fond feelings had no share;
To her he was a brother; ’twas a name
Her infant friendship had bestowed on him—
No more.
Byron.
The years that had been spent by Gloria in study during the school terms, or in travel during her vacations, had been passed by David Lindsay on the little sandy island near the promontory.

This was his post of duty. Here his aged grandmother still lived without any companion or protector but himself.

He had steadily worked on the fishing landing, and he had employed his limited leisure in studying the elementary school books left him by his little playmate. He had thoroughly mastered them all, and now he longed for more liberty and better means of culture. But, true sentinel of Providence, he would not leave his sterile post of duty to attain them.

He had long ceased to ask after Gloria, chilled by the coldness with which his modest inquiries had been met by Colonel de Crespigney.

But he had never forgotten his childhood friend. He cherished the memory of the summers passed 113in the society of his little playmate as the happiest portions of his poor life; and he worshiped her image, that in the light of that memory shone like the vision of an angel.

It was she who had found him on the beach toiling at his daily task, and had awakened his strong but dormant intelligence, and inspired him with the love and longing for knowledge.

He owed her this good, and was glad and grateful to owe it.

One morning in June, he arose early, as usual, and looking out from the little loft window of his bedroom in the island cot, he saw an unusual thing—a large schooner at the old promontory wharf, and men landing many boxes, barrels and kegs.

He had a job of work to do on the landing that day, so he dressed himself quickly, ate his breakfast in a hurry, got into his little old boat, and in a few moments rowed himself to the wharf.

“What is all this to-do?” he inquired of old Laban, who was busy receiving the goods.

“Come ashore and lend a hand here! Our young lady is coming home for good dis fall, and de house an’ groun’ is to be done up splendidly for her—an’ outen her money, too, for I know Marse Colonel hasn’t got none to spare!” answered the negro, as he let down a heavy box he had been helping to land.

David Lindsay secured his boat, sprang on the wharf, and gave his assistance to the men.

“So Miss de la Vera is really coming home?” he ventured to ask of Laban.

“Yes, on de first October! Ole Marse Colonel, he done gone to Baltimo’ to take her out’n school when de holidays come, an’ dey’s gwine for a trip to Lunnun 114or Europ’, or some o’ dem dere outlandish savidge parts o’ de worl’, an’ dey’s gwine to be gone all de summer; but dey’s comin’ back in de fall; dat is, ef so be de cannibals out in dem dere parts don’t kill an’ eat ’em fust! I fink it’s downright dange’ous an’ a temptin’ o’ Providence to leave one’s ’spectable home an’ go traipsin’ off to dem dare igno’nt places—Lunnun an’ Europ’, and de like!” exclaimed Laban, in a tone of disgust and abhorrence.

“Miss de la Vera going to Europe!” said David Lindsay, to himself rather than to Laban.

“Hi! what I tell you, boy? Yes, gwine to Europ’ long o’ Marse Colonel Discrepancy! Gwine to see de savidges what lib across de big sea. Dare now, yer got it. I calls it a downright fiyin’ inter de face ob Providence. I does! What he fink, de Lord A’mighty put de big sea a rollin’ ’tween we an’ de cannibals for he to go an’ sail across it on a big ship out’n contrariness?” said Laban.

“Is Miss Agrippina to be one of the party?” inquired the young man.

“No. Miss Aggravater is gwine to stay here to watch the workmen. Miss Aggravater gwine indeed! Catch her at it! Wish she was, dough! She might go, ’dout any danger. Cannibals wouldn’t eat her, leastways not if dey wa’n’t uncommon hungry.”

David Lindsay said no more, but mused, as he helped to land the goods.

“Dere’s an’ arckman an’ a decorum an’ a skippin’ gardener comin’ down by de stage-coach to-morrow,” explained Laban, meaning the architect, decorator and landscape gardener engaged by Colonel de Crespigney to transfigure the dreary 115promontory and its prison-like buildings into a habitable home for the young heiress.

“And a precious deal ob money it is a gwine to cost, too, wherever it comes from, which I do ’spects it’ll be out’n Miss Glo’s own fortin’, for Marse Colonel Discrepancy hasn’t got too much to tro’ away, dat I knows.”

Laban was mistaken. He had been misled by appearances.

Marcel de Crespigney, leading his hermit life at the promontory, never receiving company and never going from home except when he went to take his ward from school, spent little money, had few wants, and lived like a very much poorer gentleman than he really was.

Hence, in the years he had spent at the promontory, the revenues from the fisheries, though not large, had been left to accumulate until they had reached a round sum, which he determined to invest in the restoration and improvement of Promontory Hall, to make his home as attractive as possible to his beautiful and beloved ward.

The goods brought to the wharf were all landed and stored away in the old dilapidated store-house, and then the schooner sailed away, and David Lindsay crossed the point to the fishing landing and set about his own especial work.

The next day the architect, decorator and landscape gardener came, and work began. The three principals went back and forth between the promontory and the city once or twice a month, but the workmen remained, and were quartered in the house, to the great discontent of Miss Agrippina, who vowed that she had never spent such a disagreeable summer in all the days of her life.

116The works were all completed, however, by the middle of October; the gray stone walls of the old house were completely covered by a veneering of thin white slabs, that gave the building the appearance of a marble palace. French plate-glass windows opened upon piazzas with mosaic floors and Corinthian pillars. A mansard roof crowned the mansion. A fine garden, with a parterre of flowers, bloomed around it. Beyond that, the once barren fields were verdant with grass. The fishing landing on the point had been abolished as an ugly nuisance, and a pretty pier, with an equally pretty boat-house, had been erected on the place. The old sea-wall was repaired and a hedge of Osage orange trees was planted on its inner side.

Within the house every part was refurnished freshly and handsomely, if not very expensively.

When the finishing touch was put to the hanging of the mirrors and the drooping of the curtains, the decorator and the upholsterer, who were the last of the artisans to depart, came to take leave of Miss Agrippina de Crespigney.

“And I suppose you are very glad to see the last of us, ma’am,” said Mr. Bracket, the great artist in “effects.”

“I should rather see you here than your successors,” replied Miss Agrippina, with even unusual grimness.

“Beg pardon?” said Bracket, interrogatively.

“I say I would rather see you here than your certain successors, the sheriff’s officers, for I expect they will be the next strangers I shall be called upon to entertain! Such extravagance I never did see in all the days of my life! Well, I thank Providence 117my little portion is safe enough. Marcel can’t make ducks and drakes out of that.”

The two men bowed themselves out of Mrs. “Aggravater’s” presence and went their way.

Colonel de Crespigney and Gloria were expected home in a few days. They had returned from their European tour in a steamer bound for Quebec, and were making a short tour through Canada, before completing their travels.

The first of October was a glorious autumn day. The sun was shining with dazzling splendor from a deep blue, cloudless sky; a soft, bright golden haze hung over the gorgeously colored woods and fields.

The new carriage and horses had been sent to St. Inigoes to meet the stage that was to bring the travelers that far on their journey home. It was from this circumstance that David Lindsay knew that Colonel de Crespigney and Gloria were expected to arrive that afternoon. He knew, besides, that they could only come at low tide, when the waves would have ebbed from the “neck” and left the road free. There would be low tide at half-past three o’clock.

Now the poor young fisherman was seized with an irresistible longing to look once more upon the face of her whom he had loved with the purest and most devoted affection, from the hour of their childhood when she found him on the beach and claimed him as her playmate until this hour, when, after a seven years’ absence, she was returning home. If he should not succeed in getting a glimpse of her now, he feared that he might never see her again, for his occupation on the promontory was gone, 118since the fishing landing had been replaced by a pier and a boat-house.

He took his fishing-rod and went down on the neck at low tide, to wait for her carriage to pass.

He sat on a high rock, and baited his hook for “sheep’s-head,” which most did congregate about that spot. But before he could cast his line into the sea, the sound of wheels was heard approaching. He looked up and saw the promontory carriage coming slowly down the gradual descent leading on to the neck. He drew his broad-brimmed straw hat low over his eyes, and his heart almost stood still as he muttered within himself:

“Will she recognize ‘David Lindsay?’ I should know her anywhere, or after any length of time.”

The carriage was coming. It was wide open, the top had been thrown quite down, both back and front, that the travelers might enjoy the fresh air and fine scenery of land and water on that delicious October afternoon.

On the coachman’s box sat Laban, lazily holding the reins. On the front seat, with his back to the negro, sat Colonel de Crespigney, with his traveling cap on his knees before him, leaving his fine head, with his waving black hair and beard and his Roman features, bare.

Opposite him, on the back seat, sat a very restless young lady, with the face of an eager, vivacious child—a face with a delicate Grecian profile, a dainty, rosebud complexion, sparkling, glad blue eyes, and rippling, golden-hued hair.

She was constantly springing from side to side, gazing now on the right, now on the left, to catch glimpses of distant objects, once familiar, but long unseen.

119“Oh, uncle!” she gladly exclaimed. “I can see the tall trees on this side of the dee-ar old house!”

“Wait until you see the house, my darling!” he replied, conscious of the surprise he should give her when he should show her the gray old “penitentiary” transfigured to a white palace.

A few more turns of the wheel and he exclaimed:

“Look!”

But the effect was not what he desired and expected. She turned on him a surprised and distressed face, exclaiming:

“Oh, Marcel, what is that? Where is the dee-ar old home?”

“There it is, my precious child! That is the old home, renovated and adorned, and made worthy to receive its fair young mistress,” replied the colonel, with evident self-complacency.

“Oh, Marcel, how could you? How could you do such a thing?” she cried, reproachfully—“how could you treat the dee-ar old home that way? It is not familiar; it is not the same at all! I do not know it at all! Oh, I am so disappointed and so sorry!”

“My dear, I thought to have given you a pleasant surprise. I thought only of your happiness,” replied the poor colonel.

“And I expected to find the dee-ar old place just as I left it! Just as I left it! And, oh! look there!”

“What now, my dear?”

“Oh, Marcel! what have you done to the old sea-wall and the dee-ar old fishing landing, where I and David Lindsay used to play when we were children?”

“My dear, that fishing landing was a nuisance to sight and smell. See what a pretty pier and boat-house 120are built on its site,” said Colonel de Crespigney.

“Oh, Marcel! how could you? How could you? You have spoiled everything! You have spoiled everything! You have killed the dee-ar old place! Instead of a living being in poor old clothes, it is a dead corpse in fine dress and flowers. Oh, I shall never see the dee-ar old house and the dee-ar old landing again! If I had known this I would never have come back! I might as well have stayed in Europe. Oh, I am so disappointed and so sorry I could break my heart!” cried the girl, with a piteous look of distress into the face of her guardian; but there she met an expression of so much misery that her tone changed instantly from reproaches to self-condemnation.

“Oh, what a selfish, ungrateful wretch I am, dee-ar Marcel! And such an idiotic little fool besides. You did it all to please me, and I ought to be glad and grateful, and so I shall be when I have sense enough to appreciate it all; dee-ar Marcel, forgive me,” she pleaded, bending forward to lay her cheek against his whiskered face, as she had been used to do in her childhood.

“I am only so grieved, my child, to have given you pain instead of pleasure; but no doubt I am but a blundering brute!” sighed the colonel.

“Oh, no, no; you are the very best and dearest and most unselfish one in the world. I cannot remember the time when I did not love and honor you above all other ones on earth!”

“My little Glo’, it was all the more reason I should have studied your nature and planned for your happiness more intelligently,” sadly replied the colonel.

121“Oh, Marcel! Don’t say that, or I shall think you have not forgiven me. You have studied my happiness more than I deserved. You have done the very best for me always. In regard to these changes, they certainly do make a great improvement, which I shall be sure to appreciate and enjoy. It was only just at first, when I was looking to see the dee-ar old place in its old familiar face, that the change struck me as a disappointment, and I am such a fool for blurting out my very first thoughts and feelings!” said Gloria, caressing her uncle.

She was disappointed, poor girl; for to return some time to the old home and the old life had been the fond dream of the young, faithful heart in the long years of her exile and homesickness; and now to return and find all changed, even for the better, was a painful shock.

Colonel de Crespigney knew it now, and could not forgive himself for not anticipating such an effect.

“Do not look so grave, Marcel, or I shall think you never will forget my folly,” she pleaded. “Listen, now, and let me tell you something, Marcel! Seeing the dee-ar old place all freshened up, and decorated and changed into something else, was just as if, when I was looking for you, and expecting to see you as you used to look—why—instead of my dee-ar, old, black-bearded darkey of an uncle, I had found a golden-haired, rosy-cheeked young fairy prince! There! That expresses my feelings in regard to seeing the dee-ar old home changed into something else!”

De Crespigney smiled; he felt pleased and flattered; he also understood her better and loved her more, as he remembered that she had always cherished a sweet, loyal love for old familiar friends and 122places. He suddenly recalled the days when he had first known her as an infant of three years old, when some one had broken the head of her doll, and he himself had bought her a splendid young lady of waxen mould with rosy cheeks and flaxen hair, and dressed in silk attire, how she had hugged her poor old headless dolly to her faithful little heart and refused to part with it in favor of the radiant new one.

And later when she first arrived at the Promontory, bringing a little mongrel dog, who died soon after, and to comfort her he brought home a little white poodle, how sadly she turned away from the new claimant of her notice, murmuring, “Oh, uncle, I can’t love another little dog so soon,” though a few days afterwards she picked up the little poodle and petted him, muttering, “Poor Carlo, it wasn’t your fault that poor little Flora died, was it?” and loved him ever afterwards.

About the same time, reading the story of “Beauty and the Beast,” she had sighed, and said, “If I had been Beauty I would have loved the dee-ar old Beast; I would not have wanted to have his head cut off to change him into anything else, not even a fairy prince!”

All these traits of her childhood recurred to the mind of De Crespigney, as he listened to the little penitent’s frank confession.

“I understand, dear heart! I understand perfectly,” he said, as he raised her hand and pressed it to his lips.

She smiled radiantly on him, and then turned and looked about her, as if in search of other changes.

123Then her eyes fell upon the form of a young man seated on a rock, and apparently engaged in fishing.

She bent forward and suddenly exclaimed:

“Oh, Marcel, there is David Lindsay! I know it is David Lindsay! He has grown tall; of course, I expected to find him grown up, but he has the same face and eyes that I should know if I should meet him in Africa. Oh! I thank the Lord he is not changed into anything else! Oh, Marcel! I must speak to David Lindsay. Here, Laban, stop the horses! Stop them right here!”

The negro coachman touched his hat and drew up opposite the rock on which the young man sat, and within a few feet of it.

She leaned out, and called:

“David Lindsay! David Lindsay! Oh, David Lindsay, please come here!”

He looked up at the sound of her voice, and paled and shook with emotion as he drew in his fishing-line, laid it down beside him, arose, and approached the carriage.

“Oh, David Lindsay, how do you do? I am so overjoyed to see you once more! Why! don’t you remember me—your old playmate of the fishing landing?” she inquired, seeing that he hesitated to take the hand she had offered him.

He took the delicately gloved fingers then, however, and bowed over them.

“Why—don’t you remember the old sea-wall, and the old broken boat, and the good times we used to have there, and the little dinners we used to cook on the beach, and the little schools we used to keep? Don’t you remember, David Lindsay?” she gladly inquired, with a childlike eagerness, as she smiled upon him.

124“Oh, yes, Miss, I remember well,” he answered, in a low, subdued voice.

“Oh, I think that was the happiest time in my whole life, David Lindsay! Don’t you?”

“It was the happiest time in mine, Miss,” he replied, in the same subdued tone, as he kept his eyes fixed upon the ground, not trusting them to look at her again.

“And how is dear Granny Lindsay? Is she still at the cot on the isle? Is she as busy and active as ever?” inquired Gloria, with new interest in her tone.

“She is as well as she can be at seventy years of age, but more infirm than when you knew her last. She lives at the cot on the isle, and she is as busy, but not as active, as ever,” he answered, slowly and gravely.

“Oh, what happy, happy days we used to have at her house, David Lindsay! Such happy, happy days! Do you remember them?”

Did he not remember them?

Ah, yes! but, with her bright face beaming down upon him, bringing the light of those days so vividly before him, with the memory of their frank, childish affection then, and the consciousness of the gulf that opened between them now, it had grown more and more difficult for him to answer her. Now he seemed tongue-tied.

“Do you think she will let me come and spend a day with her, just as I used to do? Oh, how I should like to do so! It would be so like old times! Would she let me, David Lindsay?”

“Indeed, she would be very happy to do so,” replied the young man, partly recovering his voice.

“Well, then, will you ask her if I may come to-morrow? 125And will you row me over, as you used to do, David Lindsay?”

“I shall be too happy to do so, Miss de la Vera.”

“Ah, how glad I shall be to see dee-ar Granny Lindsay, and revive one of those old-time, happy, happy days!” exclaimed Gloria.

“My dear,” said Colonel de Crespigney, gravely, “the tide is coming in, and we are not more than half-way across. It is not safe to remain here a moment longer. We can scarcely cross before the road will be six feet under water!”

“And David Lindsay has to walk! He will never be able to cross in safety! And it is I who have kept him loitering here! Oh, I am so sorry! But you must not walk, indeed, David Lindsay! Get in here and sit beside me, if you please. Yes, but I insist upon it now!” she added, seeing that he did not comply with her request.

“You had better do so, Lindsay,” coldly added Colonel de Crespigney, as he left his own seat and sat down beside Gloria, leaving the front cushion free for the young man.

“I thank you very much, Miss de la Vera, and you also, sir; but I can easily walk the way before the road will be covered,” replied young Lindsay, as he bowed and retreated from the carriage.

“‘A willful man must have his way,’” said the colonel.

“Oh, Marcel, you did not invite him half cordially enough!” cried Gloria. “And suppose he was to be overtaken by the tide and swept away!”

“No danger. Look there,” said the colonel, pointing to the road before the carriage, down which David Lindsay, with his fishing tackle in his hand, was striding at a good rate.

126The horses were now started and driven off at a speed. They passed the young man, who raised his hat as they whirled out of sight.

“Marcel, I will never forgive you if David Lindsay is drowned!” exclaimed Gloria.

“No danger, Miss!” volunteered old Laban from the box. “There is a plenty o’ time, an’ he’s a famous hand at walking.”

“Foot at walking, you mean, old man, don’t you?” inquired Colonel de Crespigney.

“I don’t see how you can jest, Marcel, when any fellow-creature, not to say David Lindsay, is in peril,” exclaimed Gloria, reproachfully.

“Do you, then, suppose, my dear, that I am capable of jesting with the peril of any fellow-creature? Is not my jesting proof enough that there is no peril?” inquired the colonel, deprecatingly.

She did not answer him. She had twisted her head quite around to look back on the figure of the young man, who was striding fast behind the carriage.

And during the remainder of their rapid drive she continued from time to time to look back at the striding figure, until at length they had crossed the long stretch of road and reached the higher and broader portion of the promontory that was so soon to be turned by the high tide into an island.

Then for the last time she looked and saw that though the lowest part of the isthmus was covered with the waves, yet as David Lindsay was already ascending the rise towards the promontory, he was out of danger.

It was nearly dark when they reached the house, which was already lighted up for the reception of the travelers.

127Miss Agrippina de Crespigney, attended by Sophia and Lamia, stood in the hall to welcome them home.

She took Gloria by the waist, kissed her on both cheeks and said:

“You are looking very well, my dear. How much you have grown!”

And then Gloria returned her caresses and her compliments, saying:

“You are looking finely, aunt. You are not changed at all. I think no one is changed except David Lindsay and myself. I think people must grow up and stay so until they become very old.”

But quick Miss Grip had already turned to her nephew to shake hands with him, and left Gloria free to receive the welcome of her colored friends.

“How you has growed! My patience alibe, how you has growed, honey!” was the greeting of ’Phia.

“’Deed I is mighty proud to see you, Miss Glo’, ’deed is I!” was the cordial exclamation of Lamia.

“You had better prove your feelings in a more practical manner by showing your mistress up to her room,” said prompt Miss Grip.

“Come on, Miss Glo’!” said the unceremonious girl.

“Yes, indeed, Lamia, I do wish to lay off my wraps. I have been wearing them so long,” responded the young lady, as she followed her maid up the broad staircase to the large southeast room overlooking the sea, which had been hers in her childhood.

“Ain’t it just lovely, Miss Glo’?” triumphantly exclaimed the girl, as she threw open the door and displayed the renovated and decorated chamber, blooming like a rose in its pink silk and white lace 128curtains, its pink velvet and white satin chairs, and its pink and white walls and carpet.

“Isn’t it just lovely, now, Miss Glo’?” repeated the pleased maid.

“Oh, dear, yes, I suppose it is; but it isn’t like my dee-ar old room at all! Not even the fireplace!” she sighed, as she turned to the glowing coals on a polished steel grate that had replaced the blazing hickory logs of the old open chimney that was so familiar to her childhood.

“Why, you don’t like it, Miss Glo’!” exclaimed the girl in surprise and disappointment.

“Oh, yes, I do; but—it is not like home at all! Nothing is like home, and I feel as if I had come into a strange house, and should never reach home again!” sighed the homesick child, as she laid her hat on the pretty counterpane of white crochet over pink silk.

“And we took such pains to please you!” said the maid, sorrowfully.

“Poor Lamia! Well, I am pleased, only I would like to have seen my old room once more just as it was. Come now and help me to dress. My boxes have arrived, I suppose. They were sent by express to Leonardtown last week.”

“Oh, yes, Miss, soon as ebber de letter an’ de keys come by mail, us sent daddy wid de wagon to Lennuntowm to fetch de boxes home, which dey rove safe an’ soun’, an’ I unpacked dem an’ put all de fings ’way in de boorers an’ ward’obes.”

“That was right. Just give me the blue cashmere suit and the lace that is with it.”

The girl obeyed, and the young lady soon completed her toilet and went down stairs to join her aunt and uncle in the drawing-room.

129Dinner was soon afterward served.

When that was over, the small party returned to the drawing-room, where Colonel de Crespigney wished to show his niece the new grand piano that he had selected for her. Here was also a music-stand supplied with the works of the great masters.

He opened the piano and led her to it.

She seated herself and touched the keys, and found the instrument to be one of very superior tone.

She spent the remainder of the evening in playing and singing the favorite airs and songs of her uncle. Her voice was a pure, clear soprano, and her soul was always in her song. Hence, though she might never have achieved a grand success as a public singer, she was very effective as a parlor performer.

At the close of this musical entertainment the small party separated and retired to bed.

And so ended the day of Gloria’s return home.

CHAPTER X
MYSTERIOUS DANGER
Something of a cold mistrust,
Wonderful, and most unjust,
Something of a surly fear
Fills my soul when he is near.
Caroline Norton.
Gloria did not carry out her intention of going to Sandy Isle on the next day to see her old friend, Granny Lindsay.

130The weather had changed in the night, and a week of steady rain set in.

The small family were confined to the house, and had to find what amusement they could within doors.

Colonel de Crespigney found occupation and entertainment enough in unpacking his books from the boxes in which they had been carefully put away to keep them safe from the workmen who were in the house, engaged in the work of restoration, during his absence in Europe with his ward.

Gloria found interesting employment in turning over and inspecting the beautiful wardrobe she had brought over from London and Paris; and afterwards in rambling through all the rooms of the rejuvenated old house, to which she could scarcely become reconciled.

“Oh, it is all very fine, I dare say, and it was very good of the colonel, and I ought to admire it very much, but it reminds me of the melancholy old ladies I have seen at public places, all painted up with rouge and pearl powder. The old house was more respectable and even more beautiful and artistic in its old aspect.”

Miss de Crespigney engaged herself in preparations for her departure, for she was going South to spend the winter with her brother and sister-in-law, and had delayed her departure only to receive Colonel de Crespigney and Gloria on their return to Promontory Hall.

By the time that the rainy season came to an end and the sun of the Indian summer shone out again, Colonel de Crespigney’s books were all unpacked, catalogued, and restored to their niches in the newly furnished library; Miss de la Vera’s personal effects 131were inspected and arranged, and Miss de Crespigney’s preparations for her departure were complete.

“I have reconstructed your household government, and trained your servants so well in the seven years that I have passed in this house, Marcel, that now I think affairs will run quite smoothly in the present groove with only the nominal mistress of the house that the little countess will make. I think, however, that you should take your niece to Washington in December, and spend the fashionable season there with her, where she may have some opportunity of marriage, suitable to her rank and wealth,” said Miss de Crespigney to the colonel in a tête-à-tête she held with him on the day before she was to leave the promontory.

“Gloria is but sixteen. There is time enough five years hence to think of marrying her off,” replied Colonel de Crespigney, wincing, for he was less inclined than ever to display his treasure to the world; more disposed than before to keep her all to himself.

Late in the day, Miss de Crespigney said to the young lady:

“You must make your uncle take you to Washington for the season, my dear. It is not right that you should be buried in your youth in this remote and solitary home. You are the Countess de la Vera, and should be brought in society suited to your rank. My sister-in-law, Madame de Crespigney, will be in Washington this winter. She has no unmarried daughters of her own, and I am sure she would feel honored to chaperone the Countess Gloria. Make your uncle take you to Washington this winter, my dear.”

132“Oh, Aunt Agrippina, I thank you for your kindness in thinking about me so much, and I assure you that Marcel would do anything to please me without being made to do it; but really I do want to stay home and be quiet this winter. Ever since I left school—the first of July—I have been going to places all the time. I am so tired of going to so many places and seeing so many things. I don’t want to go away again for ever so long. I want to stay here and see all my dee-ar old friends and live the dee-ar old times over again,” pleaded Gloria.

“My child, you can never live the old times over again any more than you can go back to your baby-hood and live that over again. And as for old friends, Gloria, you have none.”

“Oh, yes! there is dee-ar Granny Lindsay and David Lindsay!”

“Not the right sort of friends for the Countess de la Vera. But there is all the more reason why you should go to Washington. I will speak to my nephew again on the subject,” said Miss de Crespigney.

And she did speak to the colonel that same afternoon, but without effect.

No doubt if she had stayed longer she might have gained her point,

“For if a man talk a very long time,” &c.
I have quoted that piece of wisdom already. Miss de Crespigney had not “a very long time” to “talk.” She was to leave Promontory Hall the next morning.

Her last “official” act that night was to call the three servants into the dining-room and give them 133a final lecture on their duties to themselves, to each other, and to their master and mistress.

“And let me impress this fact upon you,” she said, gravely; “the young lady of this house is not a Marylander. She is not even an American. She is a Portuguese West Indian, and a countess by birth and inheritance. You are not to address her, or speak of her, as Miss Glo’. I won’t have it! You are to speak of her as the Countess Gloria. Remember that!”

Then, after some other instructive discourses, the old lady distributed some presents among them and dismissed the party.

The next morning Miss de Crespigney left Promontory Hall in the old family traveling carriage, driven by Laban as far as St. Inigoes, where she was to meet the stage-coach that was to take her to Baltimore.

Her directions to the servants in regard to Miss de la Vera’s Portuguese birth and rank were remembered with simple indignation by the two women, ’Phia and Lamia, who did not know a Portuguese from a portemonnaie, or a countess from a counterpane.

“Call our Miss Glo’ countess, indeed! Sha’n’t do no sich fing! ’Deed, I fink it would be downright undespectful to call our young lady countess, as nebber had the trouble ob countin’ de chickens, or de ducks, or anyfing on de place, all her blessed life,” exclaimed ’Phia, wrathfully beating out her excitement on the feather pillow of the bed she was helping her daughter to make up.

“What Miss Aggravater means by it, anyways?” scornfully inquired Lamia.

134“Contrariness, nuffin’ else!” replied ’Phia, giving the pillow a portentous whack with her fists.

And from that time they continued to call the golden-haired girl Miss Glo’, and nothing else.

Meanwhile Gloria and her uncle lived together day after day, and week after week, and never seemed to tire of each other, or to desire any other society.

She had none of the cares that might have fallen on her as the young mistress of the house.

’Phia had been trained by Miss “Aggravater” into a model manager, and was quite capable of assuming all the responsibility and discharging all the duties of a good housekeeper.

Thus the young lady, while holding all the authority of the mistress, enjoyed all the freedom of a guest.

Every morning after breakfast she brought her little fancy work-basket down into the library, and sat in a low chair by the table where her uncle was reading or writing.

She sat very quietly working, as she used in her childhood to sit playing. She never disturbed him by a word or a movement, being contented only to remain near him.

Yet whatever might be his occupation, of reading or of writing, he was sure to share it with her. It was in this way: If he happened to be engaged with a book, he would read choice selections from his author, and then draw her thoughts forth in praise or censure of the subject, or its treatment. If he were engaged with his pen, he would read to her what he had written, and invite her to suggest any alteration or improvement that might occur to her mind.

135And he was often amused and sometimes startled by the brightness and originality of her thoughts and criticisms.

Sometimes he would pause in his employment and sit and silently watch her at her pretty work of silk embroidery. At such times, she worked more diligently than at others, keeping her eyes fixed upon her needle, and never daring to raise them to his face.

If you had asked her—why was this? she could not have told you. She did not know herself. She only knew, or rather felt, that, at such moments, to meet Marcel’s eyes made her own eyes sink to the floor, and her cheeks to burn with confusion, indignation and misery.

She hated herself for this unkind emotion, which she could neither comprehend nor conquer.

“Why,” she asked of her heart in vain—“why should I feel so wounded, insulted and offended at the steady gaze of dee-ar Marcel, who loves me so truly, and whom I love and honor more than any other one in the whole world?”

She could not answer her own question. She only felt that she hated herself for entertaining such feelings, and sometimes even hated her dee-ar Marcel for inspiring them.

From some strange intuition she had ceased to call him “Marcel, dee-ar,” with tender slowness drawing out the word into two syllables, and dwelling with pathetic fondness on the first. She called him “uncle, dear,” with respectful brevity, and nothing more.

On one occasion, while she was sitting at his feet in the library, engaged with her flower embroidery in colored silks, and not daring to raise her eyes, 136because her burning cheeks and shrinking heart assured her that he had ceased reading and was gazing steadily upon her, he said, with a touching sadness:

“I fear that you are often dull in this lonely house, dear child.”

“Oh, no, uncle, never dull,” she answered, without raising her eyes.

“And never weary of a tiresome bookworm like me?”

“Never, uncle, dear,” she answered, kindly, touched by the pathos of his tone, but half afraid of the pity that she felt for him, lest it should lead her into some vague, ill-understood wrong or woe.

“Gloria,” he said, in a strangely earnest tone.

“Well, uncle?” she breathed, in fear of—she knew not what.

“Look at me, my darling.”

She raised her eyes to his face, but when she met his glance she dropped them immediately.

“Gloria!”

“What is it, uncle, dear?”

“I wish you would not call me ‘uncle.’ I am not your uncle, child. Do you not know it?”

She did not speak or look up, but worked steadily on her embroidery, feeling that the atmosphere oppressed her so that she could scarcely breathe.

“Do you not know that I am not your uncle, Gloria? Do you not know that I am not the least kin to you? Answer me, my darling.”

“Yes, I know it,” said the perplexed girl, scarcely above her breath.

“Then you do not love me the less for not being your own uncle?”

“Oh, no,” breathed the girl.

137“While I——Ah! my child, I thank Heaven every day of my life that I am no blood relation of yours,” he added earnestly.

She heard him with a shudder, but made no reply.

“You must not call me uncle any longer, my darling. You must call me ‘Marcel,’ as you used to do. Do you hear me, Gloria? Will you call me ‘Marcel,’ as of old?”

She felt herself almost suffocating under the passion of his gaze, but she forced herself to answer, though in the lowest tone:

“I cannot do so now.”

“But why? You used to do so, my dearest. You used to call me nothing but Marcel.”

“That was—when I was a baby—or a child. I called you—what I heard others call you—as children will. I knew no better then. I know better now,” she answered, with a fruitless attempt to speak firmly; for her voice sank and almost expired, as she wished herself a thousand miles from her present seat, yet felt that she had no power to flee.

“But, my dear, you cannot go on calling me uncle, for I am not your uncle,” he answered, really pleased and flattered by the distress that he fatally misunderstood, because, in fact, it resembled the sweet confusion of the girls who had been “in love” with him in his earlier youth. “No, Gloria, you must not call me uncle,” he repeated.

“Then I must call you Colonel de Crespigney,” she replied, without raising her oppressed eyes.

“Never! that would be almost as bad as the other. No, you must call me Marcel, as you used to do. 138How sweetly the syllables fell, bird-like, bell-like, flute-like, from your lips, my darling.”

She made no answer, but wished she had the power to rise and go away.

“Gloria,” he said, dropping his voice to the lowest tone—“Gloria, I told you just now that I thanked Heaven there was no blood relationship between you and me! Can you divine, my love, why I do so thank Heaven that we are of no kin?”

She trembled, but could not speak or move.

“Can you not, my child? Ah! you do! you do!” he sighed, seizing both her hands and trying to draw her towards him.

The touch gave her the power she needed.

“No! I don’t! I don’t know what you mean!” she suddenly cried, snatching her hands from his, starting up and rushing out of the room. Nor did she stop until she had gained the solitude of her own chamber, where she banged to and locked the door, and then sank half dead upon her sofa.

She really did not know, and did not want to know, what her guardian meant by his strange speech any more than by his strange manner. “She understood a horror in his words, but not his words.” She felt a sudden abhorrence of his person that sent her flying from his presence.

And now, in the seclusion of her own room, her overwrought feelings broke forth in a flood of tears.

These relieved her, and then she began to ask herself the cause of all this excessive emotion. She could discover no reasonable cause. Her guardian had been as kind, or even kinder, than usual. He had only looked at her very intently, and asked her if she knew why he thanked Heaven that there was 139no blood relationship between them; and he had taken her hand in his to draw her nearer to him.

Now, what was there in all this to turn her sick even to faintness? To fill her with terror and disgust? To make her fling his hands off and rush from the room?

She could not tell. She said to herself that she had behaved very rudely, harshly, unkindly! Whatever her guardian had meant by his strange behavior, he had meant no evil. How could he mean evil? No, he had meant none; of that she felt quite sure all the time. And yet she had rushed rudely away from him, and hurt him who had never meant anything other than good to her, and she felt very sorry for her own conduct.

“I am too impulsive. Uncle always told me I was too impulsive. Even the mother-superior of the Sacred Heart Convent school used to tell me that unless I watched and prayed I would some day commit some fatal error on an impulse that might ruin my life. Yes, I am too impulsive. I must learn self-control, and not worry others because I cannot understand them. I have hurt my good uncle, who means me nothing but good, and I must try to make amends to him,” she said to herself.

But—she called him her “good uncle,” and not her “dee-ar Marcel,” and even in her tender compunction she felt a latent misgiving, a vague fear of some wrong or woe into which this sweet penitence might lead her.

“If I only had a mother,” she sighed.

Meanwhile, in the library, Marcel de Crespigney held an interview with himself full of bitter self-reproach and lamentations.

140“I have alarmed and repelled her by too sudden an approach. And yet I thought that six months of the close companionship and easy intercourse of travel, together with the affection and confidence she has always shown to me, had prepared the way to a nearer and dearer union! But I have been too impatient, too hasty, too importunate. I should have approached her gradually, gently. I should have remembered that she is not quite like other girls. She is very delicate, dainty, refined, sensitive—yea, a very mimosa, that shrinks and trembles at a rude breath or touch. I must be patient, very patient for weeks, for months, if I hope to win her hand.”

CHAPTER XI
TERROR
“No more! I’ll hear no more! Begone and leave me!”
“Not hear me? By my sufferings but you shall!”
Otway.
Gloria remained in her own room until the dinner-bell rang.

Then she arose, hastily arranged her dress, glanced into the mirror to be sure that all traces of the morning’s stormy emotion had passed away from her face at least, however it might still trouble her spirit or influence her conduct, and finally she went down stairs and into the dining-room.

There she found Colonel de Crespigney, looking ever paler than usual. He fixed his large, dark, dreamy eyes upon her, not offensively now, but 141with a mournfully appealing gaze, that went to her heart, as he gently took her hand and murmured:

“I am very unhappy, Gloria. I frightened you this morning, dear. I do not know how I did it. I did not mean to do it; and I beg your pardon, my child.”

“Oh, uncle, dear, do not say that. It was I, myself, who was so rude and absurd. I do not know why I was so. I never meant to be. I hope you will forgive me,” she answered, speaking from the pity of her heart.

Then with an instantaneous reaction of fear that fell like a blow upon her consciousness, she regretted her tenderness, and wished that she had not spoken so warmly.

He—ah! he only heard her gracious words, only saw her sweet smile; he could not perceive the changing, shrinking spirit. He beamed on her with a look that made her shiver, as he drew her hand within his arm and led her to the table with old-time princely courtesy, and then took his own seat.

Laban had just placed the soup on the table, and now stood behind his master’s chair to wait.

While the servant remained present there was no more conversation between the guardian and the ward than the etiquette of the dinner hour required.

But when the man had removed the cloth and placed the fruits, cake and coffee on the table and had left the room, and the uncle and niece were alone together, though the feelings of each towards the other were of the kindliest nature, yet there fell a certain painful constraint on their intercourse, such as had never existed in all their past lives, but 142such as could never quite pass away in all their future days.

How was this?

For weeks Marcel de Crespigney had rendered his youthful ward very uneasy by his manner toward her. On that morning he had frightened her from her self-possession, and she had rushed from him in terror. Later and cooler reflection had convinced her that she had really no actual cause for offence or fear. And when he had made his humble apology, her heart had been so touched that she had more than forgiven him, she had spoken tenderly to him, and she had taken all the blame upon herself. Then, with strange misgivings of wrong and woe, she had regretted her graciousness, and when he beamed on her with a look of love and joy, she had shrunk up into reserve and cautiousness.

She became possessed of that

“Surly fear and cold disgust,
Wonderful and most unjust,”
which she could neither comprehend nor conquer; for which she often blamed herself, but which now held her tongue-tied and downcast in the presence of her guardian.

He, on his own part, quick to perceive her state, felt that he had again lost her confidence and filled her with fear; and he also grew reticent in looks and speech, and consequently depressed and mournful.

She gave him a cup of coffee, without a word.

He took it with a silent bow.

Both were relieved when, at the end of the ceremony, they were free to leave the dining-room.

143She was the first to rise from the table. He followed her, opened the door, and held it until she had passed out.

In the hall Gloria paused with indecision as to her next step.

She had always been accustomed, since her return home, to go into the drawing-room, sit down at the grand piano and play some of Marcel de Crespigney’s favorite music, and, later in the evening, just before retiring, to sing some of his best-loved songs.

Now she stood for a moment in doubt. Her vague uneasiness made her wish for the privacy and safety of her own chamber. Her benevolence made her unwilling to wound her guardian’s feelings by any such avoidance of his company.

Only for a moment she hesitated, and then she led the way to the drawing-room, followed by Colonel de Crespigney.

She played and sang for him all the evening, as usual, and on bidding him good-night, gave him her hand to kiss, as before.

He merely touched it with his lips, and dropped it without a word.

Gloria went to her room and retired to bed; but it was long before she could compose herself to sleep, and when she did so her slumbers were troubled with evil dreams that kept her tossing and starting all night.

Only towards morning she slept soundly—so soundly that she was first awakened by the ringing of the breakfast-bell.

She arose in haste and dressed herself, and went down to the breakfast-room, where she found her guardian pacing to and fro, waiting for her.

144“Good-morning, uncle, dear,” she said, holding out her hand.

“‘Uncle,’ and always ‘uncle,’” he sighed, in a tone of reproach, as he held her hand and sought to meet her eyes. “I am not your uncle. I do not like the name. I have told you so, my dear. And yet it is ‘uncle,’ and always ‘uncle.’”

“Yes, it is, and must be ‘uncle,’ and always ‘uncle,’ and nothing but ‘uncle,’ from me to you, uncle, dear,” she answered, persistently, though in a trembling tone, keeping her eyes fixed upon the floor lest they should encounter his gaze—for the gaze of those large, dark, dreamy, mournful orbs was beginning to have a terror and fascination of the serpent or the devil for her.

“You have not forgiven me yet, Gloria,” he answered.

“Indeed I have,” she replied, moving quickly to her place at the head of the table and touching the call-bell to bring in Laban with the coffee pot.

Breakfast passed off very much as the dinner of the preceding day had done, in mutual constraint.

When it was over, and both left the table, Colonel de Crespigney passed into the library, where he usually spent his mornings.

It had been Gloria’s unvarying custom to follow him thither with her needlework and sit sewing in her little low chair, while he read or wrote at the table.

Now, however, she could not bear to re-enter the place of the previous day’s terror. She took her garden hat and shawl from the hall rack and put them on.

“Where are you going, my dear?” inquired the colonel.

145“For a little, solitary walk. I wish to be alone, and I need more air and exercise than I can get here. The day is so beautiful, too, that I must improve it. There are so few fine days left at this season of the year,” she answered, as she drew on her gloves.

The colonel hesitated. He would rather have joined her; but her emphatic declaration that she wished a solitary walk, forbade him to force his unwelcome company upon her.

“Good-morning, uncle, dear; I shall return before lunch,” she said, as she left the house.

He watched her until she closed the front door behind her, and then he sighed and turned sadly to his study and shut himself in.

Gloria stood on the new portico above the new terrace and looked all over the renovated domain. Terrace below terrace, the ground fell from the house down to the park wall. Below that, encircling and enclosing the round of the end, arose the high, strong, gray sea-wall, shutting out the sight of the beach. It was so solid that the only egress in that direction was through the little, substantial stone boat-house that was built against it, and whose strong, iron-bound oak doors, both landward and seaward, were kept locked.

The only means of leaving the promontory was by water through the boat-house when the doors happened to be unlocked, or by land across the Rogue’s Neck when the tide was low.

“Really, now that the sea-wall is rebuilt the place is more like a penitentiary than ever,” said Gloria to herself, as she walked away from the house.

She wanted to get off the promontory, to take a longer walk than she could get within its limits, so 146she resolved to leave it by way of Rogue’s Neck and indulge in a ramble through the wintry woods on the main.

It was a really splendid day within about a week of the Christmas holidays. No snow had fallen yet, nor were the trees of that latitude stripped of the glorious autumnal regalia. Enough bright leaves had fallen to carpet the ground with a carpet more brilliant than the looms of Axminster or Brussels ever wove; but not enough to be missed from the royal robes of the forest. The glorious beauty of the autumn woods seen across the water, so attracted the young girl that she walked swiftly on towards Rogue’s Neck, never thinking whether it were high or low tide, only anxious to cross over and plunge into the depths of the grand forest. But when she came in sight of the Neck she found, to her disappointment, that the waves were dashing wildly over the whole length and breadth of it. It was high tide, and it would be six hours before the road would be passable again.

She turned away and—met David, the young fisherman, face to face!

Her disappointment was forgotten in an instant. Her eyes danced with joy. Here was some one, at least, of whom she was not afraid—in whom she could perfectly confide—who would never terrify, humiliate, or in any way wound her.

“Oh! David Lindsay, I am so glad to see you!” she said, frankly, holding out her hand to him.

He took it, bowed, and dropped it, all in silence.

“Oh! David Lindsay, why haven’t you come to see your old playmate all this time? I have been home nearly three months, and you have not been to see me once, not once. You promised to come 147the day after my arrival to take me to see your grandmother. Well, I know it rained that day, and for a week afterwards, and you didn’t come because you knew I could not go out in such weather. But there has been very fine weather since then, yet you have never come to see your old playmate, never once—and such friends as we used to be! I take it very unkind of you, David Lindsay, that I do!” she said, with an air of injury that she really felt.

“Miss de la Vera,” gravely replied the young man, as soon as the cessation of her scolding little tongue gave him the chance, “I have been to see you many times within the last three months, but you have always been denied to me.”

“Eh!” exclaimed Gloria, opening her eyes wide with incredulous astonishment.

“I beg to repeat that I have come many times to pay my respects, but have always been denied the privilege.”

“Now, who has dared to do that? Who has dared to profane my freedom in that manner? David Lindsay, I never knew of your coming or I would have seen you. Now tell me all about it,” she exclaimed, her eyes sparkling, and her cheeks burning with the sense of wrong and outrage, as she turned about to continue her walk. He also turned and went beside her, as he answered:

“Miss de la Vera, the morning after your arrival home I came up to the hall, not by appointment, not to take you to Sandy Isle, for I knew you could not go in such a storm, but to ask you to fix another day when I might have the honor of serving you. I was met by Colonel de Crespigney, to whom I made known my errand. He told me that the weather would not permit Miss de la Vera to go out 148that day, nor was it likely that it would be any more favorable for a week to come, and when, in fact, it should be so, and when his ward should desire to make a visit, he would himself escort her. His manner told me that my visit was uncalled for, unwelcome, and improper. I bowed very low, and left him.”

“He never told me that you had been here. I blamed you for neglect. And it is all his fault. Oh! I am glad I met you, David Lindsay! Tell me more! You came again?”

“Yes, many times, Miss de la Vera, but I was always met by Colonel de Crespigney, who told me that you were occupied and could not see me.”

“But in the first place, you must have seen one of the servants. Did you then ask for me, or for the colonel?”

“For you, Miss de la Vera. I always asked the servant I happened to see to take my respectful message to yourself, that I waited on you, according to your orders. And always Colonel de Crespigney came out and told me that you were engaged, or words to the same effect, and so dismissed me, showing by his manner that he considered my call impertinent. Yet, as he did not actually forbid me to come again, and as I considered that I was acting under your orders, I continued to come once or twice a week. I was on my way to the house when we met.”

“Oh!” burst forth Gloria, with one of her irrepressible impulses. “I think it was most outrageous for any one to interfere with my liberty of action in that way! I will never submit to such control! Never! It was the farthest thing from my dear father’s thoughts that my will should be so hampered! 149He made every provision for my freedom and happiness!”

“Miss de la Vera,” said the young man, speaking conscientiously and generously, “I think your guardian acted for the best. He had the right to deny any visitor to you whom he disapproved of for any reason. My grandmother said so when I told her of my failure. And she always said, besides, that Colonel de Crespigney was the most indulgent guardian that she ever heard of, and that you had more freedom, even when a child, than any young lady she ever knew, having your own way in almost everything. And you know my old grandmother is a wise and good woman.”

“Yes, I know she is, and I honor her, and I love her dearly, and that is the reason why I wanted so much to go to see her, and asked you to come and row me over in the boat. And to think you came so often and I did not know it. Oh-h!”

“Perhaps I ought not to have persisted in coming. Perhaps I ought to have taken a hint from the colonel’s manner, and stayed away after my first repulse,” said the young fisherman.

“No, you ought not, David Lindsay. You ought to have minded me rather than him!” said the little autocrat.

“Then I ought not to have told you of my repeated rebuffs to stir up angry feelings in your bosom.”

“Now, how could you help it with such a catechiser as I am? You could not tell a falsehood by saying that you had not been there, and you could not act a falsehood by keeping silence.”

“True; but I beg you to be just to your guardian, Miss de la Vera.”

150“Oh, David Lindsay, do you be just to yourself. Is your boat here?”

“Yes, Miss. It is near this end of the Neck. I cannot land at the old fishing landing now, because of the new sea-wall and the locked boat-house blocking off all from the beach in that direction.”

“I understand. The place is more like a prison than ever. Well, David Lindsay, please to walk up with me to the house. I have a parcel there for Granny Lindsay which I want you to help me carry to the boat; for I am going to Sandy Isle to see her this morning,” said the young lady, in a tone of decision that admitted of no reply.

So the young fisherman walked obediently by her side until they reached the hall.

Gloria opened the front door, which, in that safe seclusion, was never locked in the daytime, and invited the young man to follow her in.

“Sit here in the hall, David Lindsay, while I run up to my room and get my parcel,” she said, pointing to a chair.

At that moment the study door opened on the right, and Colonel de Crespigney came out and looked about as if to see what was the matter. Of course, his eyes fell at once upon the form of the young fisherman just seated in the chair.

“David Lindsay is here, at my request, to take me to Sandy Isle to see Dame Lindsay,” said Gloria, pausing, with her hand upon the lowest post of the banisters, and her foot upon the lowest step of the stairs.

“Oh!” replied the colonel, not very graciously, as he looked slowly from the girl to the young man.

Gloria paused as if inviting or defying him to 151any controversy on the subject; but he never said another word, and after a minute’s delay went back into his study and shut the door.

Gloria flew up stairs to her chamber, and in a few moments came down with two parcels in her hand.

“I have made my bundle into two, you see; one for you to carry and one for me,” she said, as she handed him the larger one; and perhaps she could not have explained, even to herself, the subtle delicacy of feeling that induced her to do this, so as not to seem to treat her old playmate as a servant or a porter, to carry all her luggage.

David wished to take both, but her peremptory decision prevented him.

Just as they were starting to go, Colonel de Crespigney emerged from his study, cloaked and gloved. He took his hat from the rack, saying pleasantly:

“I hope you will permit me to make a third in this party, my dear. I should like to go.”

Gloria was dumfounded with astonishment. Besides, what could she say in opposition to so reasonable a proposal? She could say nothing.

The three walked out together, Colonel de Crespigney taking the little parcel from his ward’s hand and carrying it himself.

She made no objection to this. She rather liked it, because David Lindsay was also carrying a bundle.

“What are the contents of these parcels, if I may inquire, my dear?” asked her guardian.

“Presents for my dee-ar Granny Lindsay that I brought all the way from Edinboro’, but have not had the opportunity of taking to her before, because David Lindsay, whom I requested to come 152and row me over to the isle, was always denied me when he came to the house,” answered Gloria, ruthlessly.

“Ah!” said her guardian; but he offered no explanation.

David led the way to his boat, and assisted the lady and gentleman to enter it. He made them comfortable on the seats, and then taking both oars, rowed vigorously and rapidly for the little sandhill.

In a very few moments they touched the beach, and the young boatman secured the boat and assisted the passengers to land.

“Now,” said Gloria, addressing her two companions, as her queenly eyes traveled slowly from one to the other, “you two will please to bring my bundles as far as the door of the house, but no farther. I want you, if you please, then to return to the boat and wait for me; for I want my dee-ar Granny Lindsay all to myself to-day.”

“Very well, little despot; you shall be obeyed,” said Colonel de Crespigney, answering for both, as they led the way to the dame’s cottage, followed by the young girl.

The day was cold, though clear, so the cottage door was closed.

“Here, now, leave the bundles, and go your way. I will join you in the boat, in half an hour,” said Gloria.

Her two servants set down their burdens where they were told to put them, and went where they were ordered to go.

Gloria watched them—not out of sight, for that she could not, on the tiny islet, where, from the rocky centre to the sandy circumference, everything 153was distinctly visible; but she watched them go down to the beach and begin to walk around it, before she knocked at the cottage door.

“I wonder if uncle will say anything to David Lindsay? I hope he will not, for it was I who brought him to the house this time,” she said to herself, as she knocked again, for her first summons had not been answered. Now, however, the door opened, and Dame Lindsay appeared, smiling kindly, as of old, though looking rather feebler and more infirm than Gloria had ever seen her.

“Ah, young lady, is it ’eeself at last come to see the old ’oman? I knew ’ee would sooner or later! Come in, dearie. Eh! then, what is all this? and where is David, that he has not brought them for ’ee?” she said, on espying the parcels.

“Oh, Granny Lindsay, he did bring them for me, he and uncle; but I would not let them stop. I sent them back to the boat, because I wanted to have you all to myself,” said Gloria, as she picked up one bundle, while the old woman took the other, and they entered the house together.

“Now sit ’ee down, and take off ’ee things, dearie,” said the dame, as she placed a chair.

“I will sit down, dear Granny Lindsay, but not take off my hat this time, because uncle would come, and his doing so has prevented me from spending the day with you as I wished so much to do; for, oh! I remember what happy, happy days I used to have here with you and David! And nothing is changed here! Nothing, nothing! The very chest of drawers and table and chairs sit in the very places where they used to sit in the sweet old time.”

“Why, dearie, everything sits where it must sit. 154In a room like this everything is put into the place where it fits best, and there it has to stay. There is no room for alterations, dearie.”

“Well, I like to see it as it used to be. Now, dear Granny Lindsay, I must tell you that I wanted to come to see you the day after my arrival home; but it was raining that day and for a week afterwards, and when it cleared off and David Lindsay so kindly came to fetch me, he was told that I was engaged. Well, I might have been doing something, and probably was, but it was nothing that I would not have willingly dropped for the sake of coming to see you, if I had only been told that David Lindsay had come for me; but I was not told—I was never told. I should never have known if I had not met him by chance this morning.”

“I know, I know, dearie, David told me. It was ’ee good guardian’s prudence, dearie, as I explained to David. ’Ee must mind ’ee guardian, dearie, and be guided and governed by him until ’ee comes of a proper age, little lady, and all the more must ’ee submit ’eeself to him who stands in a father’s place, because ’ee has no mother, dearie,” said the dame, speaking conscientiously and affectionately.

“Ah,” thought the poor girl, “if she knew how he frightens and distresses me, she would not say that! I wonder if I could tell her? No, because I could not explain! How could I explain? There is nothing to explain.”

With a sigh Gloria turned from her perplexed thoughts to the pleasant task before her.

She lifted both bundles from the floor to the table. She untied and opened one, and displayed a large double shawl of a fine black and white check, saying:

155“Now dee-ar Granny Lindsay, I know you love old Scotland, where your forefathers came from, and you would like any good thing that came from Scotland. Now, I brought this from Edinboro’ for you.”

“Did ’ee, dearie? How beautiful it is! How lovely and soft, and large, and warm it is! How kind and thoughtful it was of ’ee to bring it to the old woman! But that is nothing new. ’Ee was always good, my dearie. Now, I’ll tell ’ee how much I needed just such a shawl. My old gray woolen one is worn quite thin and threadbare. So ’ee sees how much good ’ee has done me, dearie.”

“Oh, Granny Lindsay, I feel so grateful to you for liking it so much. And look here—oh, I hope you will like these, too!” said the young girl, as she unrolled the other bundle and displayed a dress of shepherd’s cloth of a deep blue shade, and two woven underskirts of thick red flannel.

“Oh, dearie! What can I say to ’ee now for all ’ee gracious gifts? What? The old woman is almost dumb-struck, dearie, but her heart is full,” said the dame, in a voice very low, and trembling with the emotion that filled her aged eyes with tears.

“Do you like them? Will they make you more comfortable? Oh, I am so glad!”

“And here is something I got for David Lindsay. It is only a dozen Scotch pocket-handkerchiefs; but I have worked his name in the corners with my hair. Will you give them to him from his old playmate?”

“Yes, dearie, surely, if ’ee wishes it,” replied the dame, in a subdued and broken voice, for she could now refuse nothing to the affectionate girl who had 156remembered her, even in a foreign country, and brought home comforts for her age.

“And now, dee-ar Granny Lindsay, I must leave you. My half hour is up.”

“I wish ’ee could stay all day, dearie.”

“So do I; I meant to stay, but—but my guardian came with me and spoiled all my plans.”

“’Ee gardeen means ’ee well, dearie. ’Ee mustn’t rebel against his just authority.”

“Good-by, dee-ar Granny Lindsay.”

“Good-by, since ’ee must go. The good Lord keep ’ee, dearie.”

And so Gloria left the cottage, and walked rapidly down to the boat, where she found her guardian and the young fisherman waiting for her.

She entered and seated herself in the stern.

David Lindsay took up the oars and rowed quickly to the boat-house, which they reached in a few minutes.

Colonel de Crespigney handed his ward to the steps, and with a cool—“Thanks. Good-day,” to the young boatman, led her up the stairs and through to the other side of the wall.

“I wish, uncle dear, that you would leave the key in the lock always. It makes the place feel like a prison to have the boat-house, which is the only gateway and passage through the sea-wall, locked up all the time.”

“I will do anything you wish, my dear Gloria. You have only to make your will known and it shall be obeyed,” replied the colonel.

“I thank you, dear uncle. And since you are so kind, will you give orders that in future, whenever David Lindsay comes to take me to see my dee-ar old friend on the islet, I may promptly be informed 157of his presence?” inquired Gloria, with a grave earnestness that was more like a gracious command than a request.

“My dearest, yes! even that, if you make a point of it.”

“I do make a point of it.”

“I sent the young man away, I should explain, because I wished you quietly rid of him.”

“Rid of David Lindsay, uncle! Why should I be rid of him?”

“Gloria, I appreciate your need of a mother’s guidance; but—is it possible that you have no intuitions to direct you?” gravely and sadly inquired the colonel.

“If by intuitions, uncle, you mean inward teachings, yes. I have them; they are, perhaps, the best, if not the only instructions I have; and from them I learn to understand, respect, and trust him—David Lindsay—more than I can any other human being, except, perhaps, his grandmother and—yourself.”

“His grandmother and myself! Thank you, my dear,” said the colonel, wincing.

Gloria laughed. She very seldom laughed, but when she did the silver cadence of her laughter was like the shiver of silver bells, a delight to hear.

“Oh!” she exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, uncle! I should have said the Emperor Napoleon and yourself; only, unfortunately, I am not intimate enough with his imperial majesty to know whether I respect him or not.”

“Nonsense, Gloria. Be serious, my child. You may respect this young man, who has grown up on the estate; you may understand and respect him in his proper place, as much as you please; but if 158you make a companion of him, who is to understand you?—not to ask, who is to respect you, my dear?”

“Uncle!” exclaimed Gloria, flushing to the very edges of her radiant hair. “Uncle! Is it making a companion of David Lindsay to have him row me in a boat where I wish to go?”

“Yes, Gloria, decidedly so, when the boat is his own and he takes you to his own home.”

“How dreadfully you put the case, uncle!” exclaimed the girl, crimson with humiliation.

“I put it truly, dear Gloria,” answered the colonel, pursuing his advantage unsparingly. “I put it truly. You will injure yourself irreparably by such eccentric unconventionality. My poor child, it is your mother who should instruct you in all these matters, not a profane heathen of a man; only unfortunately you have no mother, and so you must even be guided by so poor a counsellor as myself.”

“I do not see what harm can come of my going to see Dame Lindsay in her grandson’s boat.”

“No, you do not see; but others will, my child, and they will criticise you. Objectionable attachments have been formed and improper marriages contracted before now between ladies of rank and men of low degree, and you——”

“Sir! I PROTEST against this talk!” she indignantly interrupted. “To whom do your remarks point? To me? To David Lindsay? Do you dare to suppose, Colonel de Crespigney, that I should ever dream—that he would ever think of—oh! what an odious thought is in your mind! Never do you dare, sir, to hint such a thing to me again!”

159“I hope never to have the occasion, my dear,” coolly replied the colonel.

“Detestable, revolting, abhorrent, odious! Oh! that you should dare to hint such a humiliation to me! I can never forgive you for it, Colonel de Crespigney! I feel more, much more than offended! I feel insulted, dishonored, humiliated! I do!” cried Gloria, vehemently.

But in all her indignation there was no scorn of David Lindsay, or of his humble calling; for in her innocent and loyal way she loved and respected her old playmate, even as she did his aged relative on the islet. It was the hypothesis of “an objectionable attachment” and “an improper marriage” at which she revolted. And if, instead of a poor, uncultivated young fisherman, the most accomplished prince on earth had been in question, she would have felt equally offended.

They had now reached the steps leading up to the portico of the front door.

Colonel de Crespigney paused there, and with his hand resting on one of the iron posts, he inquired:

“Well, shall I give the orders you requested me to issue? Shall I say that the young fisherman must be admitted to your presence whenever he may come here and ask to see you?”

“No! On your soul!” impetuously answered the girl. “No! You have killed David Lindsay! You have murdered the harmless playmate of my happy childhood! I shall never, never see him more! He is dead and buried!”

“‘Requiescat in pace,’” replied the colonel solemnly, lifting his hat.

160Gloria passed him, opened the front door, and fled up into the safety of her room.

Her “intuitions” warned the motherless child to avoid a tête-à-tête with Colonel de Crespigney.

CHAPTER XII
HOPELESS LOVE
He deemed that time, he deemed that pride
Had quenched, at length, his boyish flame,
Nor knew, till seated by her side,
His heart in all save hope the same.
Byron.
Meanwhile David Lindsay had returned to his grandmother’s cottage, his soul filled with the image of the lovely girl he had just landed on the promontory.

“I shall go mad if it continues much longer,” he groaned. “Yes, it will craze me! If I could only escape and fly to new places and scenes that would not remind me of her so constantly, so bitterly! But I cannot leave my grandmother, who has no one but me. I must stay, though I am bound to the rack. I must see my angel and not open my lips in adoration! I must suffer and not utter a cry! Why, it would insult her to tell her I love her! And yet in our innocent childhood she has set by me hours reading out of the same books. She kindled a soul under the poor fisher lad’s rough bosom!—a soul to love and to suffer the anguish of a lost Heaven in the loss of her. Oh, my little angel, did 161you know what you were doing? Oh, my little angel, my little angel, who am I that I should dare to love you? A poor, rude fisherman, to whom you came as a messenger from heaven to inspire him with intelligent life, with a soul to love and suffer. Oh! my darling, you fill my life! You are my life! I see your bright face shining in the darkness of my room at night. I hear your sweet voice ringing in the silence! What shall I do? Ah, Heaven, what shall I do? If I could ship on one of these schooners that touch here sometimes, and if I could go to new scenes where I should never meet her again, I might conquer this madness. But that is impossible at present. I must not fly from duty. I must stay here and meet whatever fate may have in store for me, and that is insanity or death, I think. Oh! I fear, I fear that I shall go mad some day, and in my madness tell her how I love her! And then—the deluge!”

So absorbed was the poor lad’s soul in his love and his woe, that it was a purely mechanical and unconscious work to row back to the islet, secure his boat, and walk up to the cot.

He did not “come to himself” until he had run his head against the door.

His grandmother opened it, smiled, and said:

“Come in, David, and see what the little lady has left here for me and for you.”

He started and entered the cottage.

Fortunately for him, the dim eyes of age did not perceive his strong emotion.

“Sit ’ee down, David, and look. Here are two ribbed flannel petticoats, such as couldn’t be got in this country for love nor money. And here is a navy blue shepherd’s cloth, and a fine large double plaid 162shawl. Look at ’em, David, lad! But Lor’, men don’t know anything about women’s wear. Well, then, look ’ee here. Here is your present, David—a dozen lovely, large, fine white linen handkerchiefs, every one of them marked with your full name by her own hand, and with her own golden hair, David—with the child’s own golden hair.”

“Give them to me!” cried the young man, eagerly catching the parcel from her hand, looking around like some wild animal, with prey that he feared would be snatched from him, and then running up the narrow stairs that led to his own loft.

“What’s come to the poor lad?” cried the old woman, gazing after him. “The Lord defend him from being taken with love!”

Meantime David Lindsay had scrambled up into his own little den.

It was a poor place, with only a leaning roof meeting in a peak overhead, with hardly room enough to stand upright, with bare walls, bare floor, and only one small window of four panes in front, which opened on hinges.

It contained a rude but clean bed, covered with a blue and white patchwork quilt, and one chest that stood under the front window, and one shelf, on which stood Gloria’s precious books. He sat down on the chest, for there was no other seat, and opened his parcel of handkerchiefs, and examined them one by one. He saw his own name on each, worked in minute golden letters, formed of Gloria’s own radiant hair. He pressed each to his lips, to his heart.

“Oh, more precious than all the treasures of Hindostan’s mines are these to me,” he murmured—“her own sacred hair, her own hallowed hands’ 163work! Oh, my angel, my angel, no word suits you but this—‘angel.’ I have this much of you, at least, and I will never part with it while I live—while I live—and then, afterwards, beyond this world, may there not be some realms of bliss where we may meet, as we met in guileless childhood and love, without a thought of any barrier of rank between us?”

This, and much more; murmured the young man to himself, as he pressed the handkerchiefs to his heart, his lips and burning forehead.

But the voice of his aged relative recalled him to his duty. With fond superstition he folded one handkerchief and put it in his bosom, with her bright hair next his heart. The others he folded carefully and put in his chest. Then he went below to hew wood and fetch water for the needs of the little home.

Gloria did not meet her uncle until the dinner hour, when her short, impulsive resentment melted away before the mournful, even meek, reserve of his manner.

After dinner she went into the drawing-room, sat down at the piano, and played for him us usual, until the hour of retiring.

The next morning, after their breakfast, as she turned to go up stairs, he called to her:

“Gloria, my dear, will you not come into the library and sit with me, as usual?”

“No, thanks, uncle dear. I have a letter to write to Aunt Agrippina.”

“Can you not write it at one of the library tables?”

“I would rather go up into my room, uncle.”

“But why?”

164“Because—well—I would rather.”

“Are you afraid of me, Gloria?” he inquired, very mournfully.

She hesitated for a moment, and then answered, firmly:

“Yes, I am.”

“But why should you be?”

“I—don’t—know,” she answered.

“Then that is a most unjust and unreasonable fear of yours, for which you can assign no cause, my child.”

She looked down and made no answer.

“Do you not yourself think so, Gloria?”

“Yes, no; I don’t know. Let me go up stairs now, please, uncle,” she said, in growing distress.

“I do not hinder you, my child. You are as free as air. Go,” he said.

Relieved to be free, she ran up stairs; but happening to look down as she turned around on the landing, she saw him standing still, looking so lonely and miserable that her heart reproached her for selfishness, if not for cruelty. She paused and hesitated for a moment and then ran down again and said:

“Uncle dear, if you want me, I will come in and sit with you. Of course I can write my letter just as well on the library table. Do you want me?”

“My child, I always want you. Every moment of my life I want you,” he answered in a low tone as he opened the library for her to enter.

She had a little rosewood writing-desk of her own on one of the tables.

He went and opened it for her and placed a chair before it.

As soon as she had seated herself he went and sat 165down at his own reading stand and assumed an air of melancholy reserve that he knew would touch her heart and calm her fears.

“I must be very patient and very cautious in dealing with my dear, my birdling, if I would ever win her to my bosom,” he said to himself.

And from that day for many days he was very guarded in his manner to his sensitive ward, maintaining always a mournfully affectionate yet somewhat reserved demeanor.

Gloria was not quite reassured. Her confidence, once so rudely shaken, could not be quite firmly re-established. She continued to decline a tête-à-tête with him whenever she could do so without rudeness or unkindness. She walked out more than usual. The weather continued to be very fine for the season.

Christmas Eve was a most glorious day. There was not a cloud in all the sky. The sun shone down with dazzling splendor from the deep blue heavens. The ripples of the sea flashed and sparkled like liquid sapphires. The woods on the main glowed in the light.

The scene was too tempting.

Gloria put on her fur jacket and hood and walked forth to the “Neck.”

She found the tide at its lowest ebb and the road to the main high and dry.

She set off to walk across it. It was the first time she had ever done so. The “Neck,” indeed, was a natural bridge of rock connecting the promontory to the main and affording an excellent roadway when the tide was low, but quite impassable, being at least six feet under water when the tide was high.

It was very low now and the path was very clear.

166Gloria walked on, so inspired by the glory and gladness of the sun, the sky, the sea, the woods that her spirits soared like a bird, and, like a bird, broke forth in song.

She sang as she walked. The way was long but joyous with light and beauty, even though the season was near mid-winter.

At length she reached the main and bent her step to the gorgeous woods, still wearing their regal autumn dress.

Gloria plunged into their depths and rambled and reveled in their delightful solitudes. The song birds had flown farther south, yet the air seemed full of jubilant music. Was it in the air or in her own spirit? She could not tell. She was so gay and glad! She wandered on and on, tempted by vistas of crimson, golden, and purple avenues, more graceful in form than classic arches.

At length she spied, at some distance off, in the deepest depths of the forest, a scene like a conflagration—a cluster of trees burning, glowing and sparkling like fire in the rays of the sun that struck down upon their tops.

Fascinated by the vision, she made her way toward it, and found a clump of holly trees, thick with bright scarlet berries.

“Oh, I must have some of these to decorate the house to-night,” she said, as she began to pull those that were in her reach. But when she had plucked all that hung low, she found that she had not enough for her purpose.

“I cannot get any more, so I had better take these home and come back again and bring Laban 167to climb the trees for me, and get enough from the top branches.”

With this resolve she turned and retraced her steps, but soon lost herself in the pathless woods, and wandered about for hours trying to find her way out of them. She had no fear whatever. She was sure that she should emerge safely some time or other. She only felt some little haste to get home time enough to bring Laban back for the holly.

At length her confidence was justified. She caught a glimpse of the sea through a thinner growth of the woods, and, walking toward it, soon came out on the bank above the “Neck.” She descended quickly, and began to cross.

No one in that neighborhood would have ventured to go over the “Neck” at such a time. It was in pure ignorance that Gloria did it.

She did not even notice how much the Neck had narrowed since she crossed it four hours before, when the tide was at its lowest ebb, and was even then turning. It had been coming in ever since, and now there was but about four feet width of the road left in the middle of the Neck—abundant space for a foot-path if it should not narrow too rapidly.

Gloria had not a thought of danger when she set out to recross the Neck.

She walked on, singing as she went, and if a wave higher than usual dashed quite across her path, why, it fell back immediately, only wetting her shoes and skirts a little.

She went on, singing, while the glad waves danced up each side her road, coming nearer and nearer, narrowing her path.

Still she went on, singing, having to stop sometimes 168when her path would be entirely covered by a rising wave, and wait till it had fallen back.

Then again she went on, singing, ever singing, until she reached a spot about midway between the main and the promontory, when a wave, higher and stronger than before, struck her, staggered her, and nearly threw her down. Then for a moment she quailed, and ceased to sing. But the next instant the wave had receded and left a narrow path clear before her.

Then she hurried on again, not singing now, but with an awful consciousness of danger upon her; an awful prevision of the world beyond this, which her spirit might reach before her body should touch the shore.

Another higher, stronger wave came rising and roaring, and struck her down. It receded instantly, and she struggled to her feet, half stunned, strangled, and blinded.

Soon the path was entirely under water, and she had to wade in half knee-deep, and with that prevision, awful, holy, sweet, of being on the threshold of the other life.

“Mother, mother, if I must go, if I must go, come and meet me. I’m afraid, oh, I’m afraid of the great dark!” was her mute prayer, as another grand wave, howling like some furious beast of prey, reared itself above and threw her down.

Once more, as it fell back howling, she struggled up to her feet, more stunned, strangled, blinded, and dazed than before, and toiling for dear life, waded on knee-deep in water. Her limbs were failing, her head was dizzy, her senses were leaving her.

“I must go—I am going. Oh, Lord Jesus! Thou 169who art ‘the Resurrection and the Life,’ raise me! save me!” she breathed, in a strange half trance, in which she saw the heavens opened.

And at that moment the last wave struck her down, seized her and whirled her away.

CHAPTER XIII
ON A STRANGE BED
Will she again,
From that death-like repose,
When those sealed eyes unclose,
Awake to pain?
Anon.
It was late in the afternoon of the same day that saw Gloria de la Vera swept away by the tide.

In the cosy cottage on the sandy islet, old Dame Lindsay sat over the bright, open wood fire, knitting busily; the tea-kettle hung over the blaze, singing merrily; the covered “spider” sat upon the hearth, emitting a spicy odor of baking ginger-bread; the black “pussy” was coiled up in one corner, and the white puppy in the other.

The tea-table stood in the middle of the floor, set for two persons, gay with the best cups and saucers on the bright japanned waiter, and tempting with plates full of delicately sliced ham and cold bread, and a pretty print of fresh butter.

Dame Lindsay at length rolled up her knitting and laid it aside on the mantel-shelf; took off her spectacles and put them in their case, and that into 170her pocket, then picked up the little iron tongs and lifted the lid from the spider to examine the progress of her cakes, found them doing well, and covered them again.

Finally she went to the window and looked out across the sea to the shore where the wooded hills rolled backward to the western horizon, behind which the setting sun was dropping out of sight.

“Well, now, I do wonder what can keep David? He promised to be back before sunset, and he never broke a promise nor missed an appointment before,” she said, as she held one hand above her eyes and scanned the track of waters between the main shore and the little landing-place on the islet.

She watched until the sun held set, the faint after-glow had faded from the sky and sea, and the short winter twilight of the shortest days had darkened into night.

“Something has happened. I trust in the Lord it is nothing ill,” she said, as she left the window and went to the fireplace, and lighted the two home-dipped tallow candles that stood on the mantelpiece.

She did not pull down the blue window blind; she left it up, saying to herself:

“He shall see the light of home to cheer him across the dark sea, poor lad.”

She had scarcely said so much when the sound of hurrying footsteps smote her ears, and before she had time to cross the room, the door was violently pushed open, and David Lindsay strode into the house, bareheaded, with disordered hair, haggard face and starting eyes; wearing nothing but a wet and frozen shirt and trowsers, and bearing in his 171arms a girl’s lifeless form, wrapped closely in his own great-coat.

“Gloria is dead! She is dead! I saw her drowned before my eyes! I saw her drowned before I could reach her! My darling! My darling! My angel! Oh, my little angel!” he groaned, as he bore her to the bed, laid her on it and dropped on his knees, burying his head beside her.

“Father of mercies! how did it happen?” cried the old dame, clasping her hands in anguish, as she came up.

“Oh, don’t ask me now! Try to recover her, try! Oh, she must not! shall not die!” exclaimed the young man, starting like a maniac from his kneeling posture, and staring around him with a wild manner, half prayerful, half defiant, wholly insane.

“Yes, we must try! We must never give up,” quickly replied Dame Lindsay, who in her long life as a fisherman’s daughter, wife and mother, had had varied experience in drowned persons, resuscitated or buried.

And fast as age and infirmities would permit, she scrambled up the narrow stairs that led to the loft and quickly drew the blankets and mattress from David’s bed and rolled them down to the room below.

Then she followed them in their descent, and straightened the mattress on the floor, and laid the blankets over it.

“Now lift her up, and lay her here, David, and then leave the room. I must take off her wet clothes, wind her in a warm blanket, and roll her. That I must do without your help,” said the dame, with a calm authority that would have compelled obedience from any one.

172But the young man indeed was so stupefied and distracted by anguish and despair, that he was more than willing to be led or driven.

Moaning and groaning in bitterest woe, he lifted the lifeless form and laid it on its right side on the blanket over the mattress on the floor, and then went up stairs and threw himself down near the landing to pray with all his soul for her revival, and to listen with all his senses for any murmur of her returning life that might reach him there.

Meanwhile the dame rolled the drowned girl over on her face, with her wrist bent under her forehead to raise it, and then leaving her so for a moment, went and hung a large blanket over several chairs before the fire. Then she removed the wet raiment from the victim, and laid down the hot blanket, and rolled her over and wrapped her in it, and rolled and rubbed until some good results began to appear, and her own strength to wane.

Then she called to the anxious watcher above:

“Come down, David, and help me now. There is hope, my lad. There is hope!”

“Oh, thank the Lord! Thank the Lord! From this time forth I will live to the Lord!” exclaimed the young man in an earnest outburst of gratitude, too deep for gladness, as he hurried down the stairs.

“Ah! my boy, I said there was hope, not certainty,” sighed the dame.

“If there is hope, there is certainty. If the Lord ‘is not mocked,’ neither does he mock his children. I have prayed, oh! how I have prayed! And the answer is, there is hope! So there is certainty!” exclaimed David Lindsay, as he dropped on his 173knees before the prostrate form that lay wound in the blanket on the mattress.

“You know what to do, David. Lay your hand between her shoulders and continue to move her gently to and fro, if you wish to save her life. When I get the bed ready we will lay her in it,” said the old woman, as she spread more blankets to heat before the fire.

When they were ready she put one over the bottom sheet in the bed, and called her grandson to lift the precious burden just as it was and lay it there.

When he had obeyed her, she spread another warm blanket over the form, which now began to quiver slightly as from pain.

“She lives! Oh, thank Heaven, she does live!” cried David.

“Easy, lad! Easy! There is more hope, but no certainty yet. I could not feel any pulse, as I held her wrist just now,” said Dame Lindsay, cautiously.

In mad haste, David thrust his hand amid the wrappings and found and felt the delicate wrist.

“It beats! It beats! Her pulse does beat! I can scarcely feel it, it is so small—but it beats!” he cried.

“I hope it may be so,” said the dame, who had taken a little brandy from a small bottle that she kept for emergencies and put it into a mug with some boiling water, sugar and spice.

When the highly stimulating cordial was ready, she brought it to the bedside and looked at the face of the girl.

That face had changed from its white repose to a look of helpless, intense suffering.

174“You see she is recovering!” exclaimed David, triumphantly.

“Yes, I see she is, poor child!” replied the dame, as with a small teaspoon she tried to pass a little of the spiced brandy, drop by drop, between the pale and writhen lips.

Much has been falsely said and written about the agony of death, when every doctor knows that death, in itself, is no agony at all; and every true Christian feels that it is a release from all pain, a delicious falling asleep, for a few hours, to awake in the glad and glorious surprise of the higher and better life.

But no one who has not experienced it knows, or can know, the insufferable anguish of resuscitation from apparent death. The almost stagnant blood beginning to circulate again through nearly collapsed veins and arteries, inflicts tortures upon every nerve—tortures unheard of in the cruelest inquisition. Red-hot needles seem to be piercing every nerve of the body and pore of the skin. It is an agony that even the torpor of the brain does not overcome. And the victim writhes and moans with anguish, while quite unconscious of his condition or surroundings. He only feels; he knows nothing.

As soon as the sufferer, struggling through pain back to life, began to breathe more freely, Dame Lindsay, without speaking to her, or in any way disturbing her, quietly administered a composing drink that soon sent her into a sweet, natural sleep. Then she placed bottles of hot water to her feet and between her shoulders, covered her up very warmly, and hung a clean quilt before the bed to shade her from the light of the fire.

“Now, lad, she is comfortable, and when she 175wakes up, whether to-night or to-morrow morning, she will be all right. She will want nourishment the very first thing. Fortunately, I have got that piece of beef ’ee brought for to-morrow’s dinner. I will cut the lean pieces from it and make some beef tea, and keep it by the fire ready for her. But now carry the mattress and things back up stairs and come back to ’ee supper. ’Ee must be hungry by this time, and—— Eh? Why there ’ee stands in ’ee wet clothes all this time, and I taking no notice. Go change ’em, boy! Go change ’em this minute, or ’ee’ll get ’ee death of cold. Eh! to think I should ’a forgot ’ee! But the lass was so near dead! Go, lad, go!”

“Don’t be uneasy, grandmother. I don’t catch cold from sea water; and now I am so fired with joy and gratitude that I couldn’t take cold,” said the young man, as he cleared the floor of bedding and carried the bundle up stairs.

Meanwhile, the dame put the supper—hot ginger-bread and all—on the table; and by the time she had finished the work, David came down in dry clothing to join her.

She refrained from questioning him until he had got through with his evening meal, and she had cleared away the table.

Then, when they were seated together before the cheerful fire, Dame Lindsay knitting, and occasionally watching the saucepan which contained the beef tea she had made and set to simmer on the coals, and David busy with a bit of bone carving in his hand, the old woman said:

“Now, lad, tell me how all this happened.”

“I was in the boat coming from the main when I happened to look towards the Rogues’ Neck, and 176there I saw some one attempting to cross. The passenger was about half-way over and the tide was rising rapidly. I knew, of course, whoever it might be, could never succeed in reaching either shore, but would certainly be overtaken by the tide and drowned unless I could reach the Neck in time for rescue.”

“And ’ee didn’t know it was she?” inquired the dame.

“No, I did not even know whether it was a man or a woman. I could only see that it was some one. But I turned and rowed as fast as I could for the Neck. Then I saw it was a woman, and I rowed faster than ever; for the tide was so high even then that she could scarcely keep her feet.”

“Poor lass! Go on, David.”

“I pulled on the oars as hard as I could and made the best speed; I shouted to her to take courage. She did not seem to hear or see me; but, oh, grandmother, when I got within a few yards of that spot I recognized her—in the same instant that I saw her whelmed off and whirled away! Indeed, for a moment, I seemed to have lost my senses. But soon I rallied and rowed to the spot where I had seen her disappear. Then I threw off my overcoat and jacket to be ready, and I watched to see her rise. I knew she would rise near the Neck, or be thrown upon it by the returning wave, so there I watched. I saw her rise at last. I threw myself into the sea, dived as she went down again, caught her raiment, dragged her to the surface, and drew her toward the boat. I had some difficulty in recovering the boat, and getting into it with my precious burden. She was quite insensible and cold, but I wrapped her in my jacket and overcoat, and laid her down in 177the bottom of the boat on her right side, with her breast and face turned downward, and her wrists bent under her forehead, and I kept one of my hands between her shoulders, moving her gently from time to time—as we do to recover the drowned, you know—while I rowed as well as I could with the other hand, and so reached our landing at last. I brought her here because it was so much nearer than her own home. But, oh, granny, when I lifted her out of the boat I thought she was dead!”

“So she would have been, lad, if it hadn’t been for ’ee care,” said the dame.

“And have I, by the Lord’s help, saved her life? Are you sure she will take no fatal harm from that ice-cold plunge in the sea?” inquired the young man, in a painful doubt, strangely inconsistent with his expressed confidence at a less hopeful time.

Before replying to his question the dame went to the bedside and examined her patient, then she came back and said:

“Yes, lad, ’ee has certainly saved the little lady’s life. She will take no harm now. She is in a sound sleep and a gentle perspiration. She is perfectly safe now. So ’ee may rest satisfied.”

“‘Satisfied,’ dear granny!” exclaimed the youth, with a look of radiant happiness on his face. “‘Satisfied?’ Why, I am overjoyed, crowned, blessed! I would rather have saved her precious life than to have won all the wealth, fame, power and glory of this world!”

“I believe ’ee, lad! I believe ’ee!”

“But, what do I say? The glory of this world? Why, I would rather have saved her sacred life than have won Heaven!”

“Eh! Stop there, lad! ’Ee’s growing profane! 178Is that ’ee gratitude to the Lord? Stop at the glory of this world, lad, and do not compare any earthly good with the heavenly blessedness,” said the dame, laying down her knitting and placing her spectacles high on her cap that she might look him straight in the face with her earnest blue eyes.

“I did not mean to be profane,” said David, meekly.

The good woman resumed her work, and David took up his own, and they worked in silence until the hour for retiring drew near, when Dame Lindsay finally rolled up her knitting, took off her spectacles and put them both away, and said:

“Now, David, read a chapter from the Word, and then get ’ee to bed, lad.”

“And you, granny? Where will you sleep?” inquired the young man.

“I shall sit in my old arm-chair by the fire as long as I can keep up, and then I shall lie down on the bed beside the lassie, so as to wake readily if she should stir.”

“Don’t sit up too long, dear granny. You are not able.”

“Don’t ’ee fear, Davie; I’ll lie down when I grow weary.”

David brought the Bible and seated himself at the table opposite his aged relative, and read parts of the first and second chapters of Matthew, recording the genealogy and birth of our Saviour. Then the dame folded her hands and reverently prayed for both, that they might be able to receive the Lord in their affections in that sacred Christmas season, and be led by Him forever.

“Now, David, lad, get ’ee to bed,” she said, as she arose from her knees.

179“If I can be of any use during the night, will you call me, granny?”

“Ay, lad, be sure of that.”

Then David kissed her withered hand and went up to his loft; but instead of going into bed, he placed himself on the floor with his feet through the trap-door, resting on the highest step, and there he sat and watched and listened until Christmas Eve passed into Christmas Morn.

About midnight he heard his grandmother rise from her chair and cross the room, to lie down beside the sleeping girl.

Then he bent his head and called:

“Granny! granny!”

“Ay, lad, what is it?”

“Can I do anything at all?”

“Nay, boy. Get ’ee back to bed.”

She did not suspect that he had not been in bed.

He resumed his watch and kept it up until daylight. He scarcely heard a sound from below, except an occasional slight sigh, or motion from the old woman, who, like all aged persons, was a very light sleeper.

When morning dawned, David heard his grandmother rise and open the windows.

Then he called down the stairs once more:

“Granny——”

“Ay, lad.”

“Can I help you now?”

“Ay, lad, put on ’ee clothes and come down.”

David had not taken off his clothes, and therefore had not to put them on. He instantly descended the narrow stairs and stood before his grandmother.

“I never knew ’ee to dress so quick, lad,” she said.

180“That was because I was not undressed. What can I do first, granny?”

“Ay, indeed! ’Ee’s been sitting up all night! It was a useless loss of rest, Davie, but well meant. Take ’eeself off now to the shed and bring in some wood, lad.”

The young man went out to do her bidding, and soon returned with an armful of brown hickory logs, which he laid upon the fire.

Then he took the tea-kettle out and filled it from the cistern and brought it back and hung it over the blaze.

Every movement of the old woman and the young man was made quietly and noiselessly, so as not to disturb the calm sleeper, who as yet gave no signs of waking.

“Now, lad, I’ll leave ’ee here to watch the kettle. Take it off as soon as it boils, and don’t forget to turn the johnny cake,” said Dame Lindsay, as she took her fresh sweet pail and went out to milk the cow, a duty she would never allow David to do for her. Indeed, the act of setting a man or boy to milk would have shocked her ideas of the fitness of things. She would have thought it an insult to the cow.

When she had closed the door behind her, David Lindsay gave a glance to the fireplace, to see that all was right there, and then he went on tiptoe to the side of the bed and gazed reverently on “the sleeping beauty.”

The quilt that had been hung in front to shield her eyes from the ruddy blaze of the fire on the previous night, when repose was so necessary to her shattered nervous system, was now removed to give her more air; for the time had come when it would 181be well for her to awake. The bed had been straightened into perfect order and the white counterpane drawn up, so that only the lovely face, laying with its right cheek on the pillow, and forehead towards the front of the bed, was visible. The golden hair had been drawn away from the nape of the neck and carried up over the pillow, where it lay a shining mass of curls. A very pathetic face it was, with the tender eyes half shut, the sweet lips half closed. Her sleep looked like the “deep deliciousness of death”; though had it been really that, it might have been said with equal truth that it looked like the sweetest sleep.

David Lindsay sank on his knees beside the bed and gazed on the beautiful, unconscious face turned towards him, as he never would have dared to gaze had those features been instinct with wakeful intelligence. And then, out of the fullness of his heart, he began to murmur words of passionate love to those sealed ears that he never would have ventured to utter had they been listening—words of reverential, worshiping love, that for their incoherence and extravagance could scarcely bear repetition here. He lifted a tress of the floating golden hair and pressed it to his lips, while his tears fell thick and heavily.

“Why do I love you?” he sighed at length. “I know it is vain, and worse than vain! I am but a clod of the earth! And you, what are you? I scarcely know. Something so pure, so precious, so sacred, that it seems sacrilege to touch this halo around your head, these peerless tresses. Yet I love you! I love you! Clod as I am, I love you, oh! unattainable blessing! I might as well love a queen on her throne, the sun in the heavens, the moon, or 182any glorious, infinitely distant star! Oh, Gloria! Gloria! Bright seraph, why did you come and shine on this poor earth that I am, to quicken it with a living soul—to wake it to such love, such suffering, such despair?”

Down went his head again upon the side of the bed, while his bosom heaved with heavy sobs, and his tears fell like rain.

“David Lindsay.”

Her sweet voice fell on his ears like a benediction.

He lifted his head. She was awake, and gazing gently on his troubled face.

“What is the matter, David Lindsay? What has happened?” she inquired, with a look of sympathy and deep perplexity.

“Nothing; I mean—yes, something has happened, but it is well over, and, oh, how I thank heaven to hear you speak again!” he said, with an effort to recover his self-control, as he arose from his knees.

“What? Is the little lady awake at last? Well, it is time. It would not have been good for her to have slept longer,” said the voice of Dame Lindsay, who had just entered the room and approached the bed.

“She has just this instant opened her eyes, and has scarcely yet collected her thoughts, I think,” said the young man, in a low tone, as he gave place to the old woman, and went out of the house to conceal from her the traces of his strong emotion.

“How does ’ee feel, dearie?” inquired the dame, bending over the revived girl.

“I don’t think I quite know,” answered Gloria, with a bewildered look, as she passed her hand over her forehead, as if to clear away some mental mist 183of forgetfulness, and opened her eyes, half raised herself in bed and gazed around her.

“Does ’ee know me, dearie?”

“Oh, yes, dee-ar, good Dame Lindsay, but I don’t remember——”

“Does ’ee know where ’ee is, darling?”

“To be sure I do know this dee-ar old cottage, but I can’t remember coming here at all!”

“As how should ’ee, indeed, darling? ’Ee knowed nothing about it! Now, don’t talk any more, and don’t even think, if ’ee can help it; but lie still until I bring ’ee some strong beef tea to nourish ’ee and give strength,” said the good woman, as she laid the girl’s head back on the pillow and drew the counterpane up to her chin.

But a change came over Gloria’s face. Dark memory, like a cloud, arose and overcast it; yet she mistook the reality for a dream, and she shuddered as she said:

“Oh, dee-ar Granny Lindsay, don’t go yet! Give me your hand, and let me hold you fast! I am frightened—I am frightened——”

“What is the matter with ’ee, dearie?” inquired the sympathetic woman, as she gave her hand, which the girl clasped spasmodically, and held fast.

“Oh, Granny, Granny Lindsay, I have had such a horrid, horrid nightmare! I dreamed that I was drowning, and, oh, I saw and felt it all, as if it had been real! Oh, Granny Lindsay, don’t leave me yet, but tell me what has happened, and how I came to be here? Have I been ill a long time?—and delirious? I have heard of people being so ill and delirious that they could know nothing of the passage of time. Uncle was so, you know, after auntie died. Have I been so long?”

184“No, dearie, ’ee couldn’t talk so fast, if ’ee had been,” replied the dame, with a smile.

“Then what has happened, and how is it that I am here instead of at home?”

“’Ee has had a ducking in the sea, lassie, no worse. ’Ee was swept off the Rogue’s Neck by the tide, when ’ee was too late in trying to cross, and ’ee might have——”

“Oh, yes, yes, yes, it was no nightmare, but an awful fact!” murmured the girl to herself, as she pressed her hands upon her face.

“And ’ee might have been drowned sure enough if Davie hadn’t seen ’ee from his boat and picked ’ee up, dearie.”

“David Lindsay?” breathed the girl.

“Ay, dearie, David Lindsay. He picked ’ee up and brought ’ee home here, because it was so much nearer than the hall, ’ee knows, dearie.”

“David Lindsay saved my life!” murmured the girl, dreamily.

“Ay, little lady, he did; and so ’ee got no worse harm than a cold ducking—though indeed ’ee was quite insensible, and seemed lifeless when ’ee was brought here in the arms of Davie. But ’ee’s all right now, dearie.”

“David Lindsay saved my life!” reiterated the girl, dwelling fondly on the words, and on the thought.

“Eh! lass, surely yes, and we must thank the Lord that ’ee was saved.”

“Yes; and David Lindsay, too! Oh! I am pleased that it was he, my old playmate, and no other. What will uncle say now?” muttered the girl, still dreamily.

“Eh! dearie, he would say that ’ee ought to take 185some nourishing food immediately. Ain’t ’ee hungry now, say?”

“Yes,” promptly replied Gloria.

“Now ’ee knows all about it, ’ee’ll not be afeard to let me go?”

“Oh, no!” said Gloria, smiling; for she was every moment growing better.

The dame brought her the beef tea and dry toast from the fire, and made her take that first, saying:

“’Ee shall have a cup of coffee or tea, whichever ’ee likes, presently; but this is the best for ’ee now.”

Gloria obediently consumed all the beef tea and dry toast, and relished both.

“Now I feel well; but I think I would rather lie here a few minutes longer, and not try to get up yet, if you will let me, dee-ar Dame Lindsay.”

“To be sure, little lady. ’Ee should lie there quietly all the morning, and when ’ee rises should rest quietly in the house for a day or two. Could ’ee be satisfied to stay here till ’ee gets over the shock?”

“Oh, yes, dee-ar Dame Lindsay, I was always so happy when here with you. Oh, I wish there would come a snow-storm, and I would be snow-bound here for a long time. But, oh, poor uncle! Does he know that David Lindsay saved my life?”

“No, dearie; there has been no time to tell him. It is early in the morning yet, ’ee knows; but after breakfast Davie must go and tell him that ’ee’s safe.”

“And that I must stay here for a few days,” added Gloria.

“Surely, dearie,” replied the old woman.

At this moment the two were startled by a loud knock.

186Dame Lindsay got up to answer the summons, but before she could cross the floor, the door was thrown violently open and Colonel de Crespigney strode into the room, looking pale, haggard, hurried, and at least thirty years older than when we saw him last.

CHAPTER XIV
DRIVEN TO DESPERATION
O, shut me nightly in a charnel house,
O’er covered quite with dead men’s rattling bones,
With reeking shanks, and yellow, chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud—
Things that to hear them told have made me tremble—
And I will do them without fear or doubt
To live unstained. Shakespeare.
“I beg your pardon for this sudden intrusion, but—I am suffering great—the greatest anxiety!” he began, casting his eyes around the room. “My ward has been missing since yesterday. Have you seen—have you heard——”

“She is safe, Colonel de Crespigney. She is quite safe. She is here,” answered Dame Lindsay, leading the visitor around the headboard of the bed, that had hitherto hidden the recumbent girl from his sight.

“Gloria, my darling!” he exclaimed, as soon as his eyes fell upon her. “Heavens, what a fright you 187have given us! What insufferable tortures of anxiety and suspense! And to find you here, and in bed, too! What does all this mean?” he demanded, turning in more displeasure than gratitude to the old dame.

“It means that the little lady, while trying to walk across the Rogue’s Neck, was overtaken by the tide and swept off to sea, and was picked up by my Davie, who happened to be out with his boat, and who brought her here as to the nearest house,” replied Dame Lindsay.

“What is all this that she tells me, Gloria?” inquired the shocked colonel.

“The truth, uncle! David Lindsay saved my life,” said the girl, with a glow of gratitude and pride.

“A gallant deed, for which he shall be most liberally rewarded,” said Colonel de Crespigney, as he sank into the chair that Dame Lindsay had silently placed for him at the side of the bed.

Gloria darted a glance full of scorn and indignation at this speech. It fell harmlessly on the colonel’s unobservant head, and he repeated: “A gallant deed, truly, of the young fisherman, and he shall be munificently paid! But, my dear girl, how could you have been so imprudent as to cross the main alone? Did you not know there was great danger?”

“I did not care. I was weary of myself and everybody else! And now I am very glad I went, for David Lindsay saved my life,” said Gloria, luxuriating over the words and the thought.

“I say it was a brave deed, for which he shall be munificently rewarded,” repeated the colonel; “but still, my darling, I think that it was a pity your life should be risked for the sake of having it saved, 188even by David Lindsay,” he added, with a little sarcasm.

“I think not! The risk and pain are compensated by the memory left behind—a sweetness that will last me all my days,” replied the girl, as a strange tenderness of joy melted and irradiated her face.

The colonel’s brow grew dark. He did not speak for a few moments; when he did it was to say:

“My dear Gloria, we owe a deep debt of gratitude to this good woman and her son—or grandson, is he? But we must not trespass on their kind hospitality. I am sure you must be sufficiently recovered to rise and dress and return with me to the hall.”

“Oh, no, sir, indeed she is not. She has been so shaken by her shock. Take an old ’oman’s word for it, sir, she had better bide here a day or two,” said Dame Lindsay, speaking earnestly for her guest.

“Indeed, uncle, she is right. I need to stay here where I am,” added Gloria.

“Will you have the kindness to withdraw for a few moments and leave me alone with my ward? I have something to say to her in private,” said Colonel de Crespigney, turning to the woman.

Dame Lindsay bent her head and went up into the little loft, and improved her time there by making David’s bed.

“Gloria, my dearest, I could not speak freely to you in the presence of your humble hostess——” began the colonel; but the willful girl impatiently interrupted him.

“‘Humble hostess,’ uncle? Why should Dame Lindsay be called ‘humble,’ indeed? I call her my honored hostess, in my own thoughts.”

189“Well, well, my little girl, call her what you will. I shall not differ with you. But, my dear, I was about to say that it is not fitting or proper that you should remain here any longer.”

“Why is it not fitting or proper, uncle?”

“Because this is the house of a young laboring man, and while you are here you are his visitor.”

“But I am his grandmother’s guest,” persisted Gloria.

“No, my child, no; the house is his, not his grandmother’s. The position is unfit, improper, indelicate. I wonder you do not see that it is so!”

“No, I do not see it. But if any one sees it, that is enough. I cannot stay, of course. I will go home with you, uncle.”

“That is right, Gloria. That is right, my dearest girl. I thank you, love, for your ready acquiescence in my views and compliance with my wishes. As for this young Lindsay, who is such a favorite protégé of yours—and deservedly so, I must admit—he shall be well paid for the service he has rendered you. I will send him a check for a thousand dollars to-morrow.”

“Marcel!” exclaimed Gloria, lifting herself up and looking him straight in the face, “if you do such a thing as that I will never forgive you as long as I live in this world!”

“Gloria, what on earth do you mean? Have you gone crazy, child?”

“No, but I think you have!”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean just what I say, Colonel de Crespigney! If you were to offer David Lindsay money for saving my life, I would never speak to you again as long as I should live on this earth!”

190“But, my dear, unreasonable child, why should I not do so?”

“‘Why?’ I wonder you, a gentleman and a soldier, you, a De Crespigney, cannot see why?” said Gloria, harping a little upon his own words of a few minutes past.

“I cannot see; but if you or any one can, I should like to be informed of the reason,” said the colonel, in the same spirit.

“Then I will tell you. Suppose it had fallen to your lot to rescue Dame Lindsay from drowning, and David Lindsay had offered you money, as much as he could afford, in payment of your services, what would you have thought? How would you have felt?”

“My dearest Gloria, the cases differ totally,” exclaimed the colonel, with a flushed brow.

“They do not differ in one essential point, uncle, and you know it, and feel it now, if you neither knew nor felt it before. I will yield to your wishes and return home with you to-day. But you must not insult my preserver by offering him any sort of reward for saving me. You may thank him, for yourself and for me; but thank him as you would thank General Stuart, or Doctor Battis, or any other gentleman of your acquaintance, had either of them rendered me the same inestimable service.”

“My dear, absurd child, I do thank him more than tongue can tell. I think the most practical way of expressing my thanks would be to send him a check for a round sum; but if you prefer that I should take off my hat to him instead, why, I will do that.”

“Yes, do that. Take off your hat to him. And, now please to go to the foot of the stairs there and call Granny Lindsay down. She will get cold if she 191stays up in that fireless loft any longer,” said Gloria, who had been anxious all this time on account of her old friend.

“Mrs. Lindsay, Miss de la Vera would like to see you,” said Colonel de Crespigney, from the foot of the ladder.

“Ay, sir, I will come down,” answered the dame, and she immediately descended.

“Granny Lindsay, my uncle has convinced me that I ought to return home with him. I am very sorry to leave you, but I must go!” said Gloria, gently.

“Ah, well, dearie, I am sorry, too—but of course ’ee must be guided by ’ee gardeen, little lady, and I hope ’ee’ll take no harm. ’Ee clothes are all dry and ready for ’ee, and I’ll wrap ’ee up warm and nice for ’ee little journey,” said the dame.

“And now, uncle, you will please to withdraw! You see there is only this one room and we must take turns.”

Colonel de Crespigney smiled good-humoredly enough as he left the house to walk up and down in the crisp, cold winter air outside.

Dame Lindsay brought the girl’s clothes from the chair over which they had been hanging near the fire.

“Granny Lindsay, where has David Lindsay gone?” inquired Gloria, as she arose and began to dress herself.

“Down to the shore to look after his boat, I reckon, lovie; or maybe he has crossed to the main to bring a load of brushwood.”

“He hurried away as soon as I awoke and you came in.”

192“Yes, dearie, he did so to give you a chance to get up and dress, I reckon.”

“Will he be back before I go?”

“I hope so, dearie.”

Gloria slowly dressed herself, and then requested that her uncle might be called in.

Dame Lindsay, meanwhile, had placed coffee, hot rolls, and broiled ham on the breakfast table, and now she went to the door and summoned Colonel de Crespigney.

“I hope you will do us the pleasure to take a cup of coffee this Christmas morning, sir,” said the dame, as she placed a chair at the table for her last visitor.

“Thanks, no; I took coffee before I left home this morning,” answered the colonel.

But Gloria sat down and drank a little cup with her hostess.

Then, not to keep her guardian waiting longer than necessary, she arose, and put on her hat and sack to depart.

“Good-by, dear friend,” she said, offering her cheek to the old dame’s kiss. “Good-by. I shall never forget your motherly kindness to me. And please to say good-by for me to David Lindsay, and tell him that I shall hold my life sweeter from this day forth, because he saved it.”

With this grateful and gracious message to her preserver, Gloria joined her uncle and left the cottage.

Involuntarily her eyes roamed all over the islet, in search of her old playmate; but in vain, for he was nowhere to be seen.

“Lean heavily on me, my child. You are pale and trembling,” said De Crespigney, tenderly, as he 193drew her hand under his arm and slackened his steps to accommodate them to her weary walk.

When they reached the shore, Gloria looked around again for some signs of David Lindsay’s presence, but there was none to be seen, not even his little boat; and this was a certain indication that the dame’s conjectures pointed to the truth, and that the young fisherman had crossed to the main.

With a sigh Gloria gave up the hope she had cherished of seeing and thanking him in person before leaving the island.

Colonel de Crespigney’s boat was waiting, and Laban, who had seen them coming, and joyfully recognized Gloria, was laying on the oars.

“Come, my dear,” said the colonel, as he handed his ward to her seat in the stern; “come, make yourself comfortable. Double your sack over your chest. It is a splendid day for late December, but the air is rather keen on the water.”

“Oh, Miss Glo’! I’s so glad you’s safe!” cried Laban, grinning from ear to ear. “’Deed we dem over to the house is been almos’ crazy ’bout yer ebber since las’ night, when yer didn’t come home to dinner. And me and Marse Colonel Discrepancy beatin’ de main woods all night long! All de blessed, live-long Christmas Ebe night! And took Fiddle ’long of us and made her smell some o’ yer close, and didn’t she take a round-about ramble t’rough dem woods?”

“Did you hunt for me all last night, Marcel, dear?” inquired Gloria, with more tenderness than she had shown him for many weeks.

“Yes, my child. Did you suppose, Gloria, that I could have rested one moment, anywhere, from the hour that you were missed until you were found? 194It was at dinner that, on your non-appearance, I inquired of your maid why you did not come, and was told that you had been gone all day to the main, and had not returned. I had no thought but that you had lost yourself in the woods, and so I set out at once, with Laban here and your little dog Fidelle, and lanterns. The tide was low when we crossed the Neck. The little animal soon struck your trail, and convinced me that I was right. You have been told how she kept us wandering around in a circle all night. In the morning, as a forlorn hope, we returned to the Promontory, took the boat and came to the island to make inquiries.”

“Oh! Marcel, dear, I never realized before how much distress my imprudence caused you,” said Gloria, penitently, as she now for the first time observed the ravages that one night’s intense anxiety had wrought in the man’s face.

“Yer better beliebe it den, Miss Glo’!” spoke up Laban. “Ef my head hadn’t been gray long afore dis, last night’s doings would a turned it! And dere’s ’Phia, gone to bed long of a sick headache, and ’Mia in de high-strikes.”

While this conversation was going on they were rapidly passing over the water between Sandy Isle and the Promontory.

With Laban’s last words, the boat grounded on the beach below the sea-wall, and the boatman drew in his oars.

“Go on to the house as fast as you can, Laban, and relieve the anxiety of your fellow-servants, so that they may be in a condition to attend Miss Davero when we get home,” said Colonel de Crespigney, as he handed his ward from the boat.

195The man very gladly obeyed, and ran on before them so rapidly that he was soon out of sight.

Colonel de Crespigney found himself alone with his ward for the first time (with the exception of the few minutes they had talked together in the little island cot, whose very walls had ears).

He drew her hand within his arm, and supporting her carefully, walked slowly on through that boat-house built in the sea-wall, and then up through the fields and ornamented grounds that lay between it and the hall.

“Gloria, my beloved, can you really estimate all I have suffered during your unexpected absence?” he inquired, as he pressed the hand that rested on his arm.

“Yes, uncle, I think I can. I am very sorry. I was not worth so much anxiety, uncle, dear.”

“Do not call me uncle! I cannot bear to hear you call me so!” he burst forth with such energy that the girl shrank from him, and shuddered through all her frame.

“Gloria! Do you not understand me? Will you never understand me? Child, I can smother my feelings no longer! I have tried to keep silence, but I cannot! Twenty-four hours of agony have overcome my last power—self-control! Oh, my love, I love you! I love you!” he cried, stopping suddenly and facing her.

“Uncle!—for Heaven’s sake, uncle!” she exclaimed, in deadly terror.

“Do not call me by that name unless you would drive me mad! I am not the least kin to you! I thank the Lord I am not your uncle; for I must be—your husband! There, it is spoken! I love you, Gloria, with a love that has broken down every barrier 196of prudence, self-control, expediency, everything! I love you with a love that is my fate, and must be yours! For you must be my wife, Gloria!” he cried, clasping her hands in his and gazing on her with eyes that seemed to burn into her soul.

One amazed and terrified look she cast upon him, and then, with a half-suppressed cry, she broke away and fled!

CHAPTER XV
THE LAST RESORT
Me miserable! Which way shall I fly?
Milton.
Gloria fled towards the house, sped through the open door, rushed up the stairs, nor ever paused until she had reached her own chamber and locked herself within it.

There she sank down into her arm-chair to recover breath. Her heart was beating fast, her head reeling.

She seemed to herself on the point of swooning or dying, and she neither feared nor cared if this were her last hour on earth.

She only feared to hear again the revolting words that had just been breathed in her shuddering ears. She only cared to escape their repetition.

This, then, was the meaning of those fixed looks that had so thrilled her nerves and curdled her blood—Marcel de Crespigney wanted to marry her! Marcel, whom she always so loyally loved as her dear aunt’s husband and widower, and as her own 197uncle by marriage, now wished to make her his wife!

She shuddered, and covered her eyes with her hands, as if to shut out the vision of such a marriage.

But she could not shut out the vision of the beautiful, rather weak face that arose before her in all its pale, pathetic, appealing sadness. Those large, dark, melancholy eyes haunted her.

She could not rouse her soul to any anger against him. She loved him too well, as she had always done from her earliest infancy to this moment. She could not now remember the day when she had not loved him better than any one in the whole world. She loved him now as well as ever—as her uncle, her Marcel—but she loathed him as a suitor for her hand.

And withal she pitied him deeply.

“Poor Marcel!” she murmured to herself when she had grown a little calmer. “Poor Marcel! He has always sacrificed himself for the happiness of other people—even for auntie—and he has never had any happiness himself. And now he is losing his reason. He certainly is losing his reason, or he would never dream of such a mad act as marrying—Ugh! I will not think of it. What a misfortune. What can have caused it? His long, lonely life perhaps. And perhaps also, as he loves me so dearly, and he has no one else but me to love, he is afraid that I will do as other young ladies do—that is, some time or other, marry and leave him. Foolish old Marcel, to think that I would leave him for any one else! If he did but know me, he would know that I should never marry. But the more I think of it, the surer I feel that that is the reason of his 198strange conduct. He loves me; he has no one left but me, and he fears that I will leave him, and so he wants to marry me just to prevent my going, and to insure my staying with him as long as he lives. But, oh, what an alternative!” she added, with a shudder.

She was, however, growing calmer, having found, as she supposed, a solution of the whole difficulty.

“Now,” she continued her mental argument, “when Marcel is made to understand that I will never leave him so long as he lives, and never even wish to leave him, but will remain with him, and be perfectly happy with him, in devoting myself entirely to his service, as the most loving and dutiful daughter or niece could do, then, of course, he will be perfectly satisfied.”

The ringing of the first dinner-bell aroused her from her reverie.

“Poor Marcel!” she said to herself. “I dare say he thinks now that he has frightened and offended me so thoroughly that I will not go down and join him at dinner, even on this Christmas-day! And indeed he did more than frighten me—he shocked me so awfully that I am sure I could never bear to look on his poor, wretched face again, if I had not found a way to cure him of his madness, and make him contented—a way that will not require any self-sacrifice on my part either, for I never dreamed of marrying and leaving him. I never liked the idea of marrying. The most unhappy people I ever saw in my life were married people—my aunt and uncle—and the happiest people I ever knew were the unmarried. No! I will never marry and leave my uncle! And when I make him understand this, he 199will renounce his foolish and sacrilegious mania and rest contented with the company of his niece.”

While turning these thoughts over in her mind, she was examining the contents of her wardrobe to select a dress suitable to the occasion.

Gloria de la Vera had always dressed in a style too old for her early youth and bright beauty. The reason was perhaps that she saw only elderly or aged people.

Now, for this Christmas tête-à-tête dinner with her uncle, she wore a dark blue moiré antique, with low neck and short sleeves richly trimmed with old point lace. Her ornaments were heirlooms of her father’s family—earrings, necklace and bracelets of pearls set in diamonds. Her rippling golden hair was carried back from her forehead and gathered into a shower of ringlets that fell over a low comb from the top of her head to her graceful shoulders.

As the second bell rang, she opened the door and descended to the drawing-room.

Meanwhile Marcel de Crespigney had returned to the house, entered the privacy of his library, and banged the door to, angrily, behind him.

And there he had spent some hours striding up and down the floor and calling down maledictions on his own head for his want of patience and self-control.

In the midst of his confusion the sound of the first dinner-bell smote his ears.

He did not attend to its warning to go and make his toilet, but continued to walk up and down the floor, breathing imprecations upon his own folly, until the more imperative clangor of the second bell summoned him.

“And now,” he said, “I suppose I have so offended 200and estranged her as to drive her away from the table so that I shall have to dine alone on Christmas-day! Well, it will serve me right if I do!”

And with another malediction upon his “madness,” he left the study and walked slowly and sadly into the dining-room.

How great was his surprise and pleasure to see his beloved Gloria standing with her hand upon the back of her chair, at the head of the table.

He noticed, too, that she was carefully and beautifully dressed—though, with her moiré antique, old point lace and diamonds, more in the style of a middle-aged matron than a very youthful maiden.

She was looking happy, too—a circumstance which he misunderstood and misinterpreted in his own favor, for he could not know what had been passing in her own mind, or that her content was founded on the faith that she had discovered a perfect solution for the difficulty in which she had previously found herself.

If the servant had not been present he would have expressed his contrition for having frightened her, and his delight in meeting her again, but there stood Laban, in his best holiday dress, a suit of fine black broadcloth, swallow-tailed coat and continuations, black satin vest and spotless linen, exhibiting at once the self-consciousness of a dandy and the solemnity of a bishop, and looking disapprobation on his shabby and rusty master, who had made no toilet in honor of the Christmas dinner.

The young lady of the house took no notice of the colonel’s neglect; yet it was to her he spoke, of course, when he said:

“I owe you an apology, my dear, for appearing before you in this style, but really——”

201“Never mind, uncle, dear. We are alone, so what does it matter? Who has a better right to appear in comfortable dishabille at his own table than you have?” she brightly inquired, thinking at the same time of the graver apology he owed her for a heavier offence.

He naturally misinterpreted her good humor, and rewarded it with a smile of gratitude.

Though they were but two, the dinner was a protracted one, for there were many courses, and the family cook would have felt enraged if every one of them had not been honored.

And old Laban—a cross between a bishop and a dandy—waited with solemnity and self-conceit.

At length it was over, and they adjourned to the drawing-room.

“Shall I play Luther’s Christmas hymn for you, uncle, dear?” inquired Gloria, as she seated herself before the piano.

“Yes, love, thank you, play that, but no more; for I wish to talk with you and settle something before I can take any interest in anything else,” he replied.

Gloria sat down and played and sang with all her usual feeling, spirit and charm.

When she had finished her hymn, she arose and went to the fire and seated herself beside her guardian; for she also wished to talk to him, and “settle something” which she believed would content them both.

Colonel de Crespigney was the first to speak.

“I was too sudden with you this morning, dear. I did not stop to consider how your nerves had been shaken by the frightful accident of yesterday, and so I startled you by a too abrupt disclosure of my feelings.” He paused a moment, and then added: 202“I beg you to forgive my want of consideration, dear child, and to let me hope——” He paused again, and she took his hand and said kindly:

“Say no more about it, uncle, dear. I understand—I understand—and I have something to reply, presently.”

“You understand, and yet you call me uncle!” he said, wincing.

“It was a slip of the tongue, Marcel, dear. A mere matter of habit. I will learn to call you anything you please, so that I may make you happy,” she answered, affectionately.

“And you will let me hope—you will let me hope—that some day, not far off, you will give yourself to me entirely; you will be my own, my precious, my pearl beyond price, my best gift of God—MY WIFE?” he breathed, in low, deep, intense tones, while his whole dark face grew radiant with happiness. He took her hand and gazed into her eyes. She drew her hand away, averted her head and shrank from him.

“My timid one, what are you afraid of?” he tenderly inquired, drawing nearer to her, and attempting gently to steal his arm around her waist, for he still fatally misunderstood her.

“Don’t, uncle, don’t! This is madness! This is sacrilege!” she exclaimed, withdrawing herself from his gentle caress. “I am not timid, uncle; but don’t do that again, or you will drive me out of your sight forever,” she added, as she walked away to a distant window, and stood there, pale and trembling, looking out, but seeing nothing.

Marcel de Crespigney remained where she had left him, leaning back into his chair, with his eyes fixed upon the fire—like hers, seeing nothing.

203He did not attempt to follow her to apologize or explain. He was sorely perplexed.

After a few moments, when she had had time to compose herself, she came back to her seat and said:

“When I ran away from you this morning, I was too much shocked and distracted to understand anything rightly, or to know what to do. But after I had come to myself I began to reflect, and, at length, I comprehended——” She paused, as if to think a little longer.

“Yes, dear; I know, I know. I will give you time. I will be very patient,” he replied, very gently and contentedly, for he still widely misinterpreted her. She did not know that he did so misinterpret her, and thus they were unconsciously at cross-purposes.

“And,” slowly continued the girl, “as soon as I comprehended, I resolved to come to you and tell you something that I have determined upon, and which I think will harmonize our lives, and make us both happy.”

“Yes, love, yes, speak freely, speak plainly!” he breathed hardly, suppressing every impulse to draw nearer to her, or to touch her hand that hung so near his, over the arm of her chair.

“Well, then, Marcel, dear—oh! it is difficult to speak of marriage, even negatively, as I shall!—but, Marcel, I know you have been thinking that some day I might, as other young folks do, marry and leave my home for another; and so, to prevent me from doing that, you dreamed of the impossible plan you proposed to me——”

“‘Impossible,’ Gloria?” he repeated, as his happy face gloomed and darkened.

204“Yes, ‘impossible,’ because insane, profane, sacrilegious! Oh, I cannot bear to think of it! Do not compel me to think of it—even negatively—after this!”

“Gloria!” he cried, in a tone of pain and reproach.

“Hear me out, dear Marcel! for indeed I mean to reassure you! Listen, then! Since you love me so well that you would even marry me—ugh!—rather than lose me, hear me promise, Marcel, that you shall never lose me. I will never, never, never leave you to marry any one at all! I will stay with you and be your own faithful, affectionate, devoted niece, loving you as if I were your daughter—loving and serving you as my dear uncle, and even as if you were my own father! Now, Marcel, I promise to do this on the word of a de la Vera, whose very name is Truth! if only you would give up this mad and sacrilegious idea of me, which, of course, I know you will readily do.”

“And is this your plan for ‘harmonizing our lives’ and making me happy?” he groaned, with such a look of anguish that Gloria could not endure it. With a low cry of pain she averted her face.

“But, child, I will not torture you, as I see I am doing now. Time and patience—time and patience work wonders. I must wait and hope—wait and hope,” he breathed, with the reiteration of misery.

She arose and stood behind him, and with her hand on the back of his chair, murmured:

“Marcel, I am not angry, but I am very, very unhappy. I must go now and stay by myself a little while.”

“Go, then, Gloria! Go!” he moaned, without turning to look at her.

205Gloria fled to her own room; but even there the agonized face she had left behind followed her, haunted her, and tormented her.

Then she dressed herself in her seal jacket and hat and went out, and walked up and down under the cold starlight of the Christmas night until she was so weary that she could walk no longer.

Finally she returned to the house and retired to bed without again seeing her guardian.

The terrible mental trials of the days and weeks that followed, surpass all powers of description.

The deep, devoted, constant love of Marcel de Crespigney for the beautiful child he called his ward, had been fanned by opposition and fear of disappointment into an intense and insane passion. He lost all patience, all self-control; he could no longer refrain from pleading with her or caressing her, even when he saw that his words and actions inflicted tortures unendurable upon the gentle and sensitive soul.

And Gloria, she suffered with a subtle anguish, difficult to analyze, impossible to describe. As his niece and child, she loved and pitied her uncle, with all her young, compassionate heart, even as she had loved and pitied him from her earliest infancy up to present girlhood. But with her Christian faith and training she believed his suit to her to be most sinful and sacrilegious, and she shrank from it in horror and loathing unspeakable and indescribable. Yet, whenever she betrayed these emotions of fear and abhorrence, the look of utter misery they would call up on his face would cause a momentary revulsion of feeling in her, melting her heart to tenderness and sympathy.

206He would be quick to see this change and gather hope from it.

Sometimes during the day, when her pity for him almost broke her own heart, she would be on the verge of sacrificing all her future life, her religious principles, her very soul’s salvation, only to give him happiness, to drive away the look of misery from his face, and see him smile again.

Sometimes at night she would dream that she had really done this, that she had become her uncle’s wife. Then she would awake with a cry of terror and rejoice that it was but a dream. At other times she would not wake so soon, but would dream on of being married to her uncle, and horrified by her position and trying to run away to hide herself, to drown herself, to do anything rather than to fall into his hands, or be compelled to live with him as her husband, and so she would moan and sigh in her troubled sleep throughout the night, and wake at last prostrated, depressed and miserable, with the thought that all too probably, in some weak moment when pity should be in the ascendant, this hideous dream might become a more hideous reality.

She had no refuge in her wretchedness, no mother, sister or friend to whom she could confide her troubles. She could not even go away from her guardian or from Promontory Hall. She had no protector in the world but him, no home on earth but his house. Besides, he was her lawful guardian, and had a guardian’s power over her—if, indeed, he ever should choose to exercise it against her will, as he never yet had done, and as she was sure he never would do. But this power would last until she should become of age, or until she should marry; for by the terms of her father’s will, her bondage as 207a ward was to terminate with her majority or her marriage. Thus she had no refuge from the guardian who never sought to coerce her inclinations in any way, but through her affections, through her love, sympathy and compassion, had gained an ever-increasing and most fatal power over her.

More and more dangerous grew her position as days and weeks went by. Every day she was weaker, looking on her lover’s despair. Every night her dreams were more terrible in their likeness to reality. To prove the degree to which her brain and nervous system were becoming affected, she began to be confused by dreams within dreams—in this way: She would dream that she awoke from a dream, and, waking, found that she was really married and miserable!

So utterly distracted was her mind that she could never be sure what was vision and what reality.

She felt herself falling into a despair that touched insanity, and inspired deadly horror of the ultimate results.

“I am sinking, day by day, deeper and deeper towards perdition! One of two things will happen to me. I shall go mad in this struggle—I shall go mad and drown myself—or else I shall marry Marcel and murder him! If I could only die decently before being driven to such extremity! Heaven help me and save me, for I cannot help or save myself!” she moaned, in utter anguish.

But the crisis was fast approaching.

It happened on a morning near the last of January.

The guardian and ward left the breakfast-room; he had his hand on the knob of the library-door, and she was on her way out for a walk, when he 208called her, and begged her to come in and sit with him for a little while.

The meekness of this prayer moved her to grant the boon.

Without a word she turned and followed him into the library.

He threw himself, with a sigh, into his great leathern arm-chair, beside his writing-table. She drew forward a low ottoman and seated herself at his feet, as she had loved to do in the quiet, peaceful days they had spent together, just after her return home.

There was something now in his face and manner so broken, subdued, resigned, as to touch her deeply with tender compassion, and draw her into demonstrations of sympathy and affection that soon deprived him of all self-control. Before he was aware, he reached down his hands, caught her up in his arms, strained her to his bosom, and pressed passionate kisses upon eyes, cheeks and lips, while speechless, breathless, she struggled and fluttered like a captured bird, until, at length, she broke away and fled from him.

He sat where she had left him, grieved and angered with himself for having shocked and distressed her whom he loved better than his own life; he cursed himself and his weakness and his folly as he had never done before! He resolved that henceforth he would put such a guard upon himself as never to offend her again, by word or look. He would not intrude upon her in any way; but when he should see her again he would humbly express his contrition and sorrow for having offended her, and would earnestly beg her forgiveness.

And she would forgive him; for, after all, what 209great wrong had he done? Only kissed her against her will; kissed her rather roughly, perhaps, but that was because she resisted him. What great offence was in that? he asked himself. Had he not seen in the parlor games of forfeits played in many a country house—had he not seen young men “pick cherries,” as they called it—run after a young girl and catch and kiss her by force, if not against her will, and been punished only by a slap on the face, administered with a laugh?

“Gloria is too fastidious, too morbid,” he said to himself.

Yet somehow he could not so excuse himself to his own conscience. Gloria was pure, dainty and refined, and he was very culpable in his conduct toward her, his conscience told him.

Now he resolved that he would ask her pardon, and after obtaining it he would be more discreet and respectful in his manner towards her until his love and patience should win her to be his wife.

Too late.

Marcel de Crespigney was never in his life again permitted to look on the face of Gloria de la Vera.

CHAPTER XVI
GLORIA’S RAGE
My drops of tears
I turn to sparks of fire.
Shakespeare.
Terrified and enraged beyond anything that she had ever experienced in all the days of her life, 210offended and revolted beyond all hope of reconciliation, Gloria had fled from the presence of her guardian and sought the sanctity of her own room.

There she locked herself in, and sat down to recover her lost wits and breath.

She sat there, looking not like the glad little Glo’ whom we first knew, and whose pulse was music and whose breath was song—no, she sat there, with her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand, and her eyes fixed on vacancy, shrunk to half their size, gleaming with twice their fire, and glowing like live coals from the white ashes of her pale and angry face—she sat there like some grim little Sphinx or Nemesis brooding revenge and plotting ruin.

“I hate him now. I can never bear to look upon his face again!”—so ran her thoughts. “To dare to kiss me on my lips! Why, my own beloved father seldom kissed me except upon my brow. And David Lindsay, my old playmate and my preserver, who loves me so unselfishly—David Lindsay, as he knelt beside my bed, on the morning after he had saved my life, only lifted a curl of my hair and pressed it to his face, and when he saw me wake and look at him, he laid the tress down reverently, as if it were something almost too sacred to be touched. And he is a poor, uncultivated man. And to think that this gentleman, this officer, this Colonel de Crespigney, should have so forgotten his honor! This guardian should have so betrayed his trust as to seize and hold me powerless and kiss me on my lips in spite of all my struggles and distress! Oh, the meanness of the act! the meanness of the act! No, I can never trust him again. I can never bear to see his face again. I will not spend another day in 211his house. But where, oh, where shall I fly? I have no place in the world to go to! Or, if I had, there is no place to which he would not follow me—not to compel my return, though as my guardian he could do that. But he would not; he would do even worse; he would so humble himself to me, would so plead with me, would look so heart-broken that he would be sure to prevail with me and coax me back. Oh, Heaven! oh, Heaven! if I cannot trust him, neither can I trust myself! I hate him, and I fear him, and yet I pity him and love him, too! And who knows but that in some moment of idiotic pity I may not consent to all he pleads for and contract this repulsive marriage? Then I should go mad and murder him, or kill myself. That is what I am afraid of. That gulf of black ruin! What shall I do? Oh, what shall I do? Where can I fly from him and from myself? Who will save me from myself and from him? Oh, WHAT shall I do?”

She leaned her head upon her hand and reflected intently for some minutes, but could think of no plan by which to escape.

Suddenly, without any volition of her own will, there flowed into her soul an inspiration. She started and raised her head as one listening to a suggestion. Her cheeks flushed and paled, and flushed again, and her eyes brightened as she arose and exclaimed:

“Yes, I will! I will do it! I will marry David Lindsay. I will put one pure, good, brave man between me and the Evil! I do not care though he is poor and rough. I know he is good and true, noble and honorable! No gentleman in the land is more so. I can trust David Lindsay—trust him 212utterly. He would never kiss me against my will—never wound or offend me in any way. Yes, I will marry my old playmate, David Lindsay, and we will keep house in earnest as we used to do in fun. And then I shall be free—free as air—for I know that by the terms of my father’s will, my guardian’s power over me and my estate ceases on the day of my marriage. I know it, for I have often heard Aunt Agrippina say how thoughtless it was in my father to make such a proviso in his will. ‘For suppose,’ she would say, ‘some fortune-hunter should marry the child, you have no power to prevent it, or to withhold her estates.’ That is the way I found it out. And I am glad it is so, for now I can marry David Lindsay, and enrich dear Dame Lindsay, and let them take me to one of my own fine houses and live with me in comfort. Or David might go to Harvard or Yale, and get the college training he has so long aspired to, and leave Dame Lindsay to take care of me. I will do it at once!”

It is wonderful how swiftly the mind acts under excitement. This whole plan swept through the mind of Gloria in a few minutes succeeding the first inspiration of the idea.

She did not now hesitate for an instant. She dressed herself quickly, and in the best and warmest suit she possessed. I said that she always dressed in the style of an old woman rather than that of a young girl. Now she put on a black velvet suit, a seal-skin sack and hat. The hat was the only girlish article she wore. Finally she drew on her brown kid gloves, took her muff and started for the door. But before she opened it she remembered that she would need more personal effects than she wore; so she laid down her muff, drew off her gloves, and 213went and found and packed a small Russian leather traveling-bag that had been her companion on her tour through Europe. This she hung upon her arm, then taking her muff, she left the room.

On reaching the landing at the foot of the stairs she found Lamia engaged in brightening the knobs of the parlor doors.

“Where is your master?” she inquired of the girl.

“In de liberary, a tearin’ up and down de room like Old Black Sam was into him—beggin’ yer pardon for sayin’ ob sich things, Miss Glo’. Does you want me to go and tell him you’d like to see him ’fore you goes out?”

“No, not at all,” replied the young lady.

“Well, where shall I say you is gone, if he ax me, Miss Glo’?”

“Tell him that I have gone to take a long walk, and he is not to wait dinner for me.”

“And when shall I say you’ll be back, Miss Glo’?”

“You needn’t tell him when, for I don’t know myself.”

“Well, so as you gets back ’fore sun-down, I s’pose marse will be satisfied,” said the unsuspicious girl, as she resumed her rubbing of the brass knob then under her hand.

Gloria then left the house to hasten on her mad errand.

She walked rapidly, like one still acting under a high pressure of excitement.

She reached the boat-house, which was no longer kept locked. She passed through it and went out upon the beach, for it was now low tide.

There she found a little boat that she had sometimes been in the habit of rowing, near the shore.

Now she got into it, put down her hand-bag and 214her muff, unhooked the boat-chain and threw it ashore, took the oar and pushed the boat off the sands, then seated herself and rowed for the little sandy island. The water was perfectly smooth, and her arms were braced by a strange, tense resolve. She sped swiftly over the intervening half mile, and in ten minutes reached her destination. She drew in her oar, and using it as a pole, struck it into the sands and pushed the boat up on the beach.

Then she picked up her hand-bag and muff and sprang ashore.

For a moment she stood still, looking all around for a chance sight of David Lindsay; for maddened as she was at this moment, there was “method” enough in that “madness” to make her unwilling to go on to the cottage and meet the placid, steady, conscientious Dame Lindsay.

She soon descried the young fisherman. He was standing on the shore at some distance, bending over an upturned boat, engaged in repairing it. His position prevented him from seeing, and the sound of his own hammer from hearing her approach, of which he remained quite unconscious even when she stood by his side.

She had nerved herself for the trial before her, yet now it seemed as if all the blood had forsaken her extremities and curdled about her heart, so pallid was her face.

She stood for a moment at his side while he continued to hammer industriously at his work, quite unconscious of her presence, until she spoke to him in a low tone.

“David Lindsay.”

He started, dropped his hammer, turned, took off his hat, and stood waiting her commands. He had 215not seen her since the morning after he had saved her life, and now he was too much amazed at her sudden appearance on the isle to find any word by which to welcome her. He could merely wait for her to make known the object of her visit.

For some moments she too continued silent. It seemed to her that it must take her life to utter the words which she had come resolved to speak, and with which this story opened:

“David Lindsay, will you marry me?”

It is not necessary to go over any part of that scene already related. It must be still fresh in the minds of our readers.

Well might the young fisherman be struck dumb with amazement and terror; well might his half palsied tongue refuse to utter any word but her own name, and that in a tone of unbounded consternation; for must not the lovely girl and wealthy heiress have lost her reason before making a proposal of marriage to any man, least of all to him—the poor, uncultivated young laborer? And when he had heard all that she had to say, well might he groan forth, in tones of deepest sorrow:

“Miss de la Vera, it is you who are mad!”

“‘Mad!’ ‘Mad!’” she echoed, her face reflecting the dismay so plainly revealed on his own countenance. “‘Mad!’ Oh, indeed, perhaps I am! But, oh, David Lindsay, if I am mad, so much the more need have I of your protection! If I am mad, oh, my old playmate, marry the poor mad girl to take care of her, to save her from herself, to save her from something worse than madness! to save her from sin! from crime! from murder! from suicide!” she exclaimed, her vehemence and wild excitement increasing with every word.

216“Great Heavens, Miss de la Vera! What has happened to drive you to this extremity?” cried the young man, turning deadly pale, in dread of he knew not what. “Tell me all! Everything, freely! You know that my heart is yours—my life is at your feet, to do your will with! You know that I would do anything on earth you wish me to do, unless it would be to do you any wrong. Now you plead with me to do that which would make this world a paradise to me, unless it should make it a purgatory to you. Now tell me all. But first sit down. You are trembling so that you can scarcely stand,” he added, as he threw off his pea-jacket, folded it and laid it on the overturned boat, to make her a comfortable seat.

She sank down, mechanically, too absorbed in the subject of her thoughts to notice how he had exposed himself to the cold for her convenience.

That she might speak with the less embarrassment, he stood a little behind her. And then, with her eyes fixed upon the ground, she told him all! And she ended with these words—fearful words for her to speak and for her old playmate to hear:

“And, oh, David Lindsay! you know how I always loved my uncle! loved him with the holy, tender, caressing love of a child for its father! And I love him so still! And I do pity him infinitely, because he suffers, and has always suffered so much! But, oh, when he wants to marry me, I hate him, oh, I hate him with the hate of a demon! I could kill him at such times! I could! I sometimes dream that I have married him and murdered him, and am flying from justice! or that I am in a condemned cell, or on the scaffold, and I wake in a cold sweat of terror and horror. And it may come 217to this, David Lindsay! It may come to this unless you save me! I can trust you, my old playmate, I can trust you utterly! And to whom could I fly but to you? Who knows me so well as you? To whom am I so well known? Whom have I on earth but you, David Lindsay? Do not stand behind me! Come around here and let me see you,” she concluded, slightly turning her head.

“God forgive me if I do wrong! God forgive me if this great temptation blinds me to the right!” murmured the young man as he left his position behind her seat.

And then—not because she was a high-born heiress stooping to him, a poor fisherman—no, indeed, for there was nothing abject in David Lindsay’s nature; but because she was a young girl driven to humiliation as unprecedented as it was undeserved—he came and humbled himself before her, sank on his knees at her feet, took her hand, bowed his forehead upon it and said:

“See me here at your bidding. I am your own, your slave, to do your will in everything. Tell me what to do!”

“Oh, David Lindsay, rise and sit beside me,” she murmured, with the tears springing to her eyes.

He obeyed her and waited for her further words.

“Take me away from here at once, David Lindsay! Take me to Washington, where we can be married. Then to my own house of Gryphynshold! There I shall be safe! You know where that is?”

“In Virginia—yes.”

“Take me there, and from that place communicate with my guardian, who must then come to a settlement and yield up all authority over me, or 218my estate; for such were the terms of my father’s will.”

“The steamboat from Norfolk to Washington will stop at La Compte’s Landing this afternoon. If we cross about now we will be sure to meet it,” said the young man.

“Then go and get ready for your journey at once, David Lindsay. I will sit here and wait for you. But what will Granny Lindsay say to your sudden departure? And, oh, what will she do, here by herself? I never thought of that before,” said the girl, compunctiously.

“Do not distress yourself, lady. All things work together for your will to-day; for this morning my grandmother left home for the first time in many years, and for an absence of some days,” replied the young man.

“Granny Lindsay from home!” exclaimed Gloria, in surprise, not unmixed with a feeling of relief.

“Yes, she is gone to St. Inigoes to keep house for the brethren until they can procure another housekeeper in place of the one recently deceased. You know they will not take one under sixty years of age,” added David, gravely.

“Oh, I am so glad she will not be left alone here!” exclaimed Gloria.

“Come up to the house, then, will you not, and rest in granny’s room, while I go in my roost and make ready?”

Gloria silently arose and followed him.

When they entered the neat room, David placed a chair for his young guest, then put the brands of fire together on the hearth, kindled them to a blaze, and hung the tea-kettle over it.

“Why do you take that trouble?” she inquired.

219“You must have a cup of tea before you go. It will not take any extra time, since the kettle will come to a boil while I am getting ready,” he replied, as he went up the ladder stairs that led through the trap-door to his own loft.

Gloria heard him walking to and fro, as he made his preparations for the unexpected journey. She, on her part, could not sit still. She felt as if she were in one of her nightmare dreams from which she could not wake. And again she felt as if she were going mad.

A sweet, homely household sound aroused her from this morbid mood. It was the singing of the tea-kettle over the fire. A happy thought came to her. She would play housewife for David Lindsay this once before leaving the cottage. She had spent days enough in the little place to know where all the stores were kept.

So she went first to the corner cupboard with the glass door, and opened it and found the little black tea-pot and the tin tea-cannister, and made the tea and set it to draw.

Then she drew out the little red-stained pine table, found the white cloth and the buck-handled knives and forks and the plated spoons in the drawer, and arranged them, then took the cups and saucers and plates from the corner cupboard, and finally she went out to the “safe” in the shed, to which in her childhood’s days she had so often followed Dame Lindsay, and found bread, butter, milk and cold meat, all of which she brought and put upon the table.

When her self-assumed task was completed, she sat down to wait, but felt too restless to sit long. Soon she arose and began to pace up and down the 220floor, when David Lindsay descended the ladder stairs, equipped for his journey, and carrying a large, black oil-skin bag in his hand.

“Ah! why did you weary yourself with this work, lady? I should soon have done it for you,” he said, as he glanced at the completed preparations for a meal.

“Well, I wanted to do it. It is not the first time I have set the table for you and me, is it, David Lindsay? Don’t you remember our little dinners, cooked with a driftwood fire on the beach? Don’t you remember the flat stone we used to have for a table, and the crash towel for a tablecloth?”

“Do I not?” he asked, as a warm smile irradiated his face. This was the first time she had seen him smile since her sudden appearance on the island.

“Come and sit down, then, and I will pour out the tea.”

They placed themselves at the table, upon which she had already set the tea-pot. They made some pretence of eating and drinking, and then Gloria inquired:

“Have we time to put everything in order before we go?”

“Oh, yes,” responded the young man, “quite time enough.”

And together they went to work and cleared away the table, and washed and replaced the dishes.

Next they took all the meat and bread and fish that was in the house and put it out in the shed, so that Priscilla and Nicholas, the cat and dog, might have something to eat during the week of Granny Lindsay’s absence.

Then David Lindsay covered up the fire, and 221locked up the house, all except the door by which they would go out.

“Ah! suppose Granny Lindsay should come back very soon?” said Gloria.

“She will not come back before I have time to write her a letter, inclosed in one to the priest, and telling them both all about our position,” said David Lindsay.

“That is all, then. I believe I have no other anxiety,” said Gloria, as they left the house together.

David Lindsay walked in advance, carrying his own large bag in one hand, and Gloria’s little one in the other.

Gloria followed, with her hands in her muff, and so they reached the sands where she had landed.

“We shall have to use your boat, lady dear, since mine lies bottom upward on the beach, waiting for repairs,” he said, as he placed the two bags in the skiff and handed his companion to a seat in the stern.

“It is uncle’s boat; but we can send it back by a man from La Compte’s Landing,” replied Gloria, as her escort took the oars and laid himself stoutly to them.

They first crossed the water to a landing on the main opposite the little island. David Lindsay pushed the boat up on the sands, and beckoned to an old negro man who was seen standing in the open door of his hut, and commissioned him or his wife to go across to the island every day to attend to the needs of Winny, the cow, and to the pig and the poultry; and gave them the use of all the milk and eggs until Dame Lindsay’s return.

222Then he pushed off and rowed away from the place.

La Compte’s Landing lay two miles down the coast, and it took a half hour’s hard rowing to reach its wharf and boat-house on the sands. Above these the land, covered with a thicket of trees, rose abruptly for several hundred feet. From the midst of the trees on the summit might be seen the chimneys and peaked roof of La Compte’s Lodge, and, farther down, the steeple of St. Luke’s church.

“This is my place also, David Lindsay, and it will soon be our place. But I would not live here. It is too near the Promontory,” said Gloria, as they landed.

An old negro man stood by the flagstaff.

“Gwine to take de boat, sar?” he inquired of the young man.

“Yes,” answered the latter.

Whereupon the negro ran up the red flag. That was the signal for the steamboat to stop for passengers.

“Dey’s so few folks trabelin’ by water dis ’clement season ob de year dat it ’most don’t seem much use to ’ploy a flagman to come down yer twice a week to ’tend it. But dey do tell me, better come ten times for noffin dan to let one passenger be disappointed.”

“But couldn’t passengers hoist the flag for themselves?” inquired the young man.

“Dem as understood could; but it ain’t ebery stranger as comes down here to take de boat what knows dey is got to raise de flag. An’ ’less de flag is riz, de boat won’t stop, when it ain’t got nobody on board to land here. And now, young marse, de boat’ll be here in a foo minutes.”

223“David, dear, come here, please,” said Gloria, walking off to a little distance.

He followed her and she placed in his hand a well-filled pocket-book.

“What is this for?” he inquired.

“For our expenses. I forgot to hand it to you before; forgot even that it would be needed; but you had better take it now, before we go on the boat.”

He flushed crimson to the very edge of his black hair, as he gave her back the pocket-book and said:

“No, lady, dear, I do not need it, indeed; I have saved something from years of labor, and I have plenty for our present needs.”

It was now Gloria’s time to blush.

“I beg your pardon, David Lindsay; I did not know, indeed I did not mean——”

But he interrupted her by lifting her gloved fingers to his lips, bowing over them, and leading her back to the wharf. Then he went to the old flagman, and, giving him some money, engaged his services to take back Colonel de Crespigney’s boat to the Promontory pier, and leave it there.

By this time the steamer was seen puffing its way towards the wharf.

In a few minutes it drew alongside and stopped.

A plank was thrown across to them and the two passengers went on board.

A few minutes more, and the steamer was blowing her way up the bay for the mouth of the Potomac River.

“You shall never repent this if my life can help it, lady, dear—though it is for you ’a leap in the dark,’” whispered David Lindsay to the grave-faced 224child that leaned upon his arm, as they stood alone together on the deck of the steamboat.

“No,” said Gloria, “it is not a leap in the dark—it is a spring into liberty and light.”

CHAPTER XVII
WED
’Tis sure some dream, some vision vain,
What I, the child of rank and wealth,
Am I the wretch that wears this chain?
G. M. L.
The sky was gray, the wind high, and the sea rough, yet David and Gloria remained on deck. He had led her to a bench behind the wheel-house, and there they sat, partly sheltered from the blast.

As the old flagman had truly said, there were not many travelers by the steamboat at this inclement season of the year—only a few country tradesmen, picked up at different points along the shores of the bay, who were taking time by the forelock and going to the Northern cities to purchase their spring goods.

All these were total strangers to Gloria and David; and as they lounged or sauntered, talking politics or smoking pipes, to and fro from stem to stern, on the deck, they scarcely bestowed a glance upon the young pair, seated behind the wheel-house, who, indeed, kept themselves aloof from all their fellow-passengers, until the ringing of the tea-bell brought them all down together into the ill-lighted saloon.

225Here Gloria found herself the only lady at the table, with a dozen or more men, officers and passengers all counted; but as the motion of the steamboat was now very rough, she took it for granted that all the other ladies who might be on board were confined to their berths by sea-sickness.

After tea the young couple returned to the deck, but found the weather too blustering for the girl; so they went again to the saloon, but found that the table had been cleared of the tea-service and the men had gathered about it in parties of four to play cards, smoke and drink; so finally they went to the companion-way leading below, and there David Lindsay bid Gloria good-night, for there was no admittance for him in the Ladies’ Cabin.

When she reached this sanctuary she found that she was the only woman on board the steamer, with the exception of the stewardess.

This latter came to proffer her services to the young lady. She was a wonderfully tall, black and spare specimen of the negro race. A striped gown and a high turban added to her unusual altitude.

“’Ebenin, Miss. Well, as yer’s de only lady here, yer kin hab fus’ choice of dese here staterooms on each side de cabin,” she said.

“Is there any difference?” inquired the girl with a smile.

“Some is double and some is single, and dem in de middle is straight, and next to de stairs is crooked.”

“Well, you shall choose for me.”

“Den I ’vise you to take a double one in de middle.”

“Thanks,” said Gloria. She did not then go into the selected state-room, but she sat down in the 226rocking-chair and put her feet to the fire in the stove.

“Reckon yer’s gwine back to school in de city arter the Christmas holidays?” ventured the stewardess.

“No,” replied the young lady.

“Den yer’s gwine long your pappy to buy goods maybe?”

“No.”

“To visit yer ’lations, den?”

“No.”

“Well, what on de face ob de yeth is yer gwine for?” bluntly inquired the stewardess.

“On business,” good-humoredly replied the girl.

“Oh!” said the woman.

There was silence for a few minutes, and then the woman began to murmur, partly to herself:

“Now, I wonder what business can call a young gal to town at this unlawful season ob de wintry wedder in a cold steamboat?”

As the young lady did not reply to this, the woman felt driven to say, more decidedly:

“You looks moughty youngish for de like ob sich, and I’d eben fink as yer ma or aunt would be goin’ wid you; but is yer gwine to buy yer weddin’ close?”

“Perhaps,” said Gloria.

“Dere! I did guess it, arter all!” triumphantly exclaimed the woman.

Then, to stop further examination, Gloria determined to turn the tables by questioning the questioner.

“What is your name, auntie?” she hastened to inquire.

“Laweeny Long, dough dey do mostly call me Long Laweeny, ’cause, yer see, honey, I is ober six 227feet tall, which can’t be said for all the men, let alone wimmin. Lay-wee-ny Long, honey! One ob de La Compte colored ladies, honey, and been runnin’ stewardess long o’ Cappin Bright ebber since my mist’ess died.”

“You are Lavinia, one of the La Compte colored people?” questioned Gloria, in surprise.

“Hi, what I tell yer? Yes, honey, one ob de La Compte colored ladies, I is. My mist’ess was Miss Eleano La Compte, what married a speckled foreigner, which he was a great man in his own country, too, I b’liebe! Howseber, he’s dead, and so is she, and lef’ one only darter an’ heiress, my present young mist’ess, dough I hab nebber seed her—Miss Delia Werry.”

“Miss de la Vera, do you mean?”

“Yes, honey, dat’s zactly what I said. Miss Delia Werry. Does yer know her, honey?”

“Not very well,” replied Gloria, with a smile. “At least, I may say with truth that I don’t know much good of her.”

“Now, look here, young gal!” wrathfully exclaimed Long Laweeny, “don’t you go a back-bitin’ my young mist’ess behind her back! Now, I tell yer good, don’t you! She’s my young mist’ess, she is, and what harm does you know of her, pray? Dere, now, what harm does you know of her?”

“I did not say that I knew any harm of her; and, moreover, if it will give you any satisfaction, auntie, I can tell you that I love Miss de la Vera very much, very much more than any one else in the world, I am afraid.”

“Den I’m glad yer does. But what make yer say yer don’t know no good o’ she?” inquired the woman, doubtfully.

228“Oh, I was jesting, you see, only jesting; for I have as much respect for Miss de la Vera as I have for myself.”

“Den yer mus’ know her right well?”

“No, I’m sure I don’t, not half as well as I would like to know her. But now—you say you belong to the estate. How comes it then that you are here as stewardess on this steamboat?”

“Hi, honey, ’cause dere ain’t been no use for me at de house since de ’stablishment was broked up, arter old Marse Cappin La Compte died, an’ de young ladies went to Washington to lib long o’ deir gardeen. Dat was about twenty years ago, honey. And all we young women servants what belonged to de house was hired out at warious places, and only two or free old grannies left to look arter it, dough all de men—field hands and fishermen and blacksmiths and carpenters, yer know, honey—was left on de ’state, ’cause deir work was to be done, whedder or no, fambily or no fambily.”

“And have you been twenty years in this service?”

“No, honey, not quite. Only ’bout seben, I reckon. I was hired out at private service before that.”

“Do you like this life?”

“I used to, honey, but I’s gettin’ tired of it. An’ I’s wishin’ for the time to come when my young mist’ess, Miss Delia Werry, will come ob age or get married, so as to come and lib at home, an’ hab her colored people about her like oder ladies, I do.”

Gloria felt extremely interested in this old family servant of her ancestors whom she had so unexpectedly met in the cabin of the steamboat, and so, without revealing her own identity to the woman, she encouraged her to talk of La Compte’s Landing 229and the old people who had lived there in times past. And as “Long Laweeny” had so interested a listener she became very diffuse in her revelations.

“They do say, Miss, that the first founder ob de family in dese parts was a brave ole sea-king, what his inimies and back-biters called a booknear or pirate, and how he buried whole shiploads of gold and silver about dese here shores an’ islands, which, if dat same treasure would be foun’, it would make de people what owns de lan’s as rich as Jews. But I don’t know as to de trufe of it.”

These and many other tales and legends of the old family did Long Laweeny relate to her attentive listener, and so whiled away the time until a late hour, when Gloria thanked the woman for the entertainment and retired to her state-room.

Though the mind of the girl was deeply disturbed by the novelty of her present position, and the uncertainty of her future fate, she did not lie long awake, but rocked by the motion of the boat, soon fell sound asleep and slept profoundly until she was awakened by the movements of the stewardess bustling about the cabin and setting it in order.

On first opening her eyes she felt surprise and fear on finding herself in the berth of a state-room on a rocking steamboat; but instantly she remembered the rash step that had placed her in this position, and her soul was filled with dismay. For a moment she repented her reckless flight, and contemplated remaining on the steamer under the protection of Long Laweeny, and returning with it on its next down voyage to her home. Only for a moment did she think of such an alternative to going on and completing her other purpose. The vision 230of her uncle and his importunities frightened her from all idea of going back.

“No!” she said to herself, “I cannot trust him. I can trust David Lindsay.”

In the spirit of this trust she met her old playmate on deck.

He, too, had had his deep sleep of oblivion and his wakening to astonishment and perplexity. But no instant’s doubt of his future course disturbed his mind; he was devoted to his lady’s service, and determined to do her will. In this spirit of loyalty he received her on deck.

The wind had shifted to the northwest and cleared the sky of every cloud; but it was now blowing dead ahead, and so the boat had both wind and current against her, and her upward progress was slow.

Gloria and David had spent the day on deck, only leaving it to go to breakfast, dinner and supper in the saloon.

After supper they separated, as before, at the head of the companion-way leading down into the ladies’ cabin, where Gloria spent the evening in drawing out Long Laweeny to talk of the old La Comptes until bed-time, when she retired to her berth. The same evening David spent in talking to the officer of the deck until the hour came which relieved the latter, and drew the former to the saloon state-room, which he shared with a country storekeeper.

It was sunset when she entered the mouth of the Potomac and near daylight when she reached Washington.

When Gloria awoke that morning the first thing that struck her was the stillness of the steamer, 231and the next a small fleet of oyster-boats, a crowded wharf, and a row of dingy warehouses—all seen through the window of her state-room as soon as she slid back the shutter.

Then she dressed quickly, for she knew the boat was at Washington.

But again she was seized with that panic of dread which had temporarily overcome her on her awakening on the previous morning. Again she felt the impulse to fly from her purpose and return to her home while there was yet time. But the vision of her uncle in his madness arose before her mind’s eye and checked her impulse.

“No, I cannot trust him! I cannot trust myself! but I can trust David Lindsay!” she said, as she completed her toilet, put her little personal effects into her traveling-bag, and went up on deck.

David Lindsay received her there and led her at once to the saloon, where the passengers were already at breakfast. She, being the only lady, received much attention. Her seat had been kept for her, and dainties were pressed upon her; but so troubled was her spirit at the prospect of her fate, that she could only swallow a little coffee and make a pretence of eating.

When the counterfeit meal was over, she arose from the table, bowed to her fellow-passengers, and left the saloon, attended by David Lindsay.

“We may go on shore at once. I had already engaged a carriage when you first came on deck,” said the young man, as he led her across the gang-plank from the wharf, where the hack was waiting.

He handed her in, saw her comfortably seated, and followed and placed himself opposite to her.

“Where to, if you please, sir?” inquired the hackman, 232touching his hat, as he held the door open in his hand.

“Wait a moment,” replied young Lindsay; and then he bent forward and whispered to Gloria:

“You have been here before, and know the place. What hotel do you prefer?”

“Uncle and I stopped at Brown’s. It was good enough, I suppose. I know nothing about the others, except that some of them looked better on the outside,” replied Gloria.

“Brown’s Hotel,” was the order the young man gave to the hack-driver, who remounted to his box and drove off.

David Lindsay had never been in any city in his life, and, therefore, he was much more pleased with his first sight of Washington than strangers usually are.

“There is the Capitol!” he exclaimed, looking out of the window on the east side. “I know it by the picture, which is very faithful,” he added.

“Yes,” replied Gloria, scarcely knowing what she said, so troubled was her spirit.

The youth looked at her wistfully, doubtfully, sorrowfully. Then he dropped his eyes and voice to the deepest expression of reverential tenderness, and said:

“Miss de la Vera, do you repent this trust you are about to repose in me? If you do, oh, speak! I am yours to do you service. To secure your happiness in any way I may be permitted to do so! To attend you all through life, if I may be so blessed—or, if not, to take you safely wherever you would go, and leave you forever, if this should be your will,” he added, as his voice broke down with emotion.

She answered him by asking another question:

233“David Lindsay, do you really love me—love me as you said you did that morning after you saved my life, when you did not know I heard you? Say, do you really love me as much as you said then?” she breathed, in accents scarcely audible.

“Do I love you? How do I love you? How can I tell you! I have no words to tell you! But I know that I could live for you, work for you, suffer for you, yes, Heaven knows, I could give my body to be burned for you, if that could insure your welfare. And because I love you so much more than I can tell you, I repeat now that I am yours to do your will, whatever it may be; yours to attend you through life if I am to be so happy, or yours to take you to some place of safety wherever you would go, and leave you there forever, at your command. Dearest lady, you have only to command.”

She was weeping heartily now.

He gently repeated his words:

“You have only to command.”

“I cannot—command—anybody! Not even myself!” she sobbed.

“What shall I do to console you? Did I not hear that Madame de Crespigney, the colonel’s old mother, was in Washington? Shall I inquire for her and take you there, and leave you under her protection?” he asked, turning pale at the thought of what her answer might be, though no other sign, not even a falter in his voice, betrayed his inward agitation.

“No!” exclaimed Gloria. “Take me there? Why, uncle would follow me. He would not compel me to return with him, but he would persuade me. Uncle masters my will when he pleads with me, and if I return to his power he may some time, in 234some paroxysm of his own distress, in some moment of my own idiotic pity, induce me to become his wife, and then, when I should have done so, I should go mad, and kill him or myself. No—no—no! I must put an eternal barrier between uncle and myself. David Lindsay, I cannot trust my uncle. I cannot trust myself. I can only trust you. Say no more about taking me anywhere but before some minister of the gospel. And”—(“don’t make me do all the courting,” she was about to add, but some subtile intuition warned her that she must not turn her tragic situation into jest, even with her trusted and faithful friend.)

The carriage, meanwhile, had rolled on to Pennsylvania Avenue, and now it drew up before “Brown’s.”

“Tell him to drive to the Ladies’ Entrance,” whispered Gloria, who saw that she would have to prompt her untraveled escort.

The order was given and obeyed.

David handed his companion down to the pavement, and paid and discharged the carriage.

“Ask to be shown to the ladies’ parlor. I can remain there until you go and find some minister, and—yes, it will be necessary for you to get a license from the register’s office at the City Hall,” she continued, in a whisper, as they followed an obsequious waiter to an upper front drawing-room that overlooked the avenue.

Gloria threw herself into a chair. There happened to be no other occupants of the parlor, though people, either the inmates of the house or visitors, might enter at any time.

“Will you want rooms, sir? The office is below,” suggested the waiter.

235David Lindsay hesitated and looked at Gloria, who murmured:

“No, do not take rooms yet. You would have to register our names, and that would be awkward just now. Wait until afterwards.”

“We do not want rooms, but will take luncheon about noon,” said the young man, turning to the waiter, who then left them and went about his business.

“How will you occupy yourself while I am gone?” inquired David Lindsay, uneasily.

“Oh, you needn’t be away half an hour. I shall stand here and look out of the window,” she answered, taking up her post.

The young man left the room.

She did not stand there long, for again some nameless horror of her position, and dread of consequences, seized upon her soul, and drove her to walking rapidly up and down the floor, muttering to herself:

“Was ever a wretched human being driven to such extremity as I am? Is there any way out of my trouble except through this strange marriage, and am I, all this time, so insane, as I suspect I am, that I cannot see it? Even David Lindsay proposed to take me to old Madame de Crespigney, and David Lindsay worships me, poor boy, that I know! But I cannot go to Madame de Crespigney! I cannot go anywhere where Marcel could follow me and subdue me by his pleadings, and draw me to my own destruction and to his! I cannot trust Marcel! I cannot trust myself! I can only trust David Lindsay! And he is no clown, if he is a poor fisherman! See how he has improved himself. He talks as well as uncle does, though he may not be able to speak 236on so many different subjects. But, oh, Heaven, what is all this to the main question? That I should be obliged to marry any one to save myself from uncle and from my own heart! I don’t want to marry! I don’t! I don’t! I don’t! I never did wish to marry! I never meant to, either! But—if I must, I would rather trust David Lindsay than any one I know.”

So, muttering to herself, she paced rapidly up and down the floor until the entrance of other ladies into this public parlor arrested her murmuring complaints, though not her steps, for she continued to walk about the floor, stopping only once in a while to look out of the windows.

Several of the occupants of the room noticed the pale, sorrowful, and restless “child,” for such they took her to be, and formed their own theories of her distress. She was doubtless on her way to school, after her Christmas holidays, and was suffering from the separation from home and friends. But these people had their own affairs on their minds, and so could bestow but little attention on the troubles of the supposed homesick school-girl, whom they hoped to see presently taken care of by her parent, or guardian, or some other responsible person who had come with her as her escort.

For more than an hour Gloria walked restlessly about, or gazed from the front windows, while people came and went to and from the room, whose occupants were thus always changing.

Then at length David Lindsay returned. She drew him to a distant window, out of the hearing of all others, that he might give an account of himself.

“I was longer than you thought I should be, because 237I had to wait some time in the register’s office before I could get our license. Afterwards I had to inquire out the residences of clergymen, and I called at several before I could find any one disengaged. At length I found one at leisure—the Rev. Mr. O’Halloran, at St. Matthew’s church. He will meet us there immediately,” whispered David Lindsay.

Gloria began to tremble visibly.

“Are you ready?” inquired the young man.

“Yes,” she answered, in a tone scarcely above her breath.

He gave her his arm and led her forth, down the stairs and out of the house, to the carriage that stood waiting for them before the door.

In another moment they were bowling rapidly up the avenue and turning into a cross street. A ten minutes’ drive brought them to old St. Matthew’s. He helped her from the carriage and led her into the church, at whose lighted altar stood the priest in his vestments, attended by one or two sacristans.

In the front pew nearest the altar were three women at their devotions.

As these were not the hours of public worship, there were no other persons in the church. Gloria wondered to see these present, but was too much troubled with other thoughts to speak of the circumstance.

David Lindsay, however, voluntarily enlightened her.

“I told the priest, in answer to his questions, that we had no witnesses to bring with us. He then said that he would have to provide them. I suppose he has done so, and these are they,” he whispered, 238as he led his trembling companion up the aisle to the chancel.

Two hassocks had been placed on the floor before the altar railings. Upon these they knelt.

The priest opened his book and began the ceremony forthwith.

The women in the front pew left their seats and drew near enough to hear the low responses of the bridegroom and the bride.

The ceremony must have been relieved from all unnecessary forms, for it was very short, and very soon over.

“I pronounce you man and wife. Those whom God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.”

The concluding words of the sacred marriage rites, uttered in the sweet and solemn tones of the officiating priest, fell upon the ears of the unhappy girl like the knell of doom.

The benediction was then pronounced, and the young pair arose from their knees.

CHAPTER XVIII
BRIDE AND GROOM
Wedded fast were we.
E. B. Browning.
“Salute your wife,” said the priest.

The young bridegroom turned to his wife—his face all glorious with the noblest love that ever inspired the soul of a world-renowned poet or warrior—and took her hand and drew her to his heart and bowed his head to offer her the customary kiss that 239was to seal the ceremony just performed between them.

She did not yield him her lips—she did not even leave him her hand, but shuddered and coldly withdrew herself.

David Lindsay turned deadly pale.

The priest and the witnesses looked surprised. Such an exhibition of unkindness, not to say rudeness, they had never seen in all their experience.

“Come into the vestry, if you please,” then said the priest.

David Lindsay, struck to the heart by his bride’s repulsion, recovered himself by an effort, drew her arm within his own and followed the clergyman.

The two sacristans and the three witnesses brought up the rear.

The parish register lay open on the table.

The newly married pair were now required to sign their names.

David Lindsay steadied himself and wrote his in clear characters.

Gloria’s hand shook so in her attempt to write that the scratches and blotches she made might have meant anything or nothing.

The witnesses affixed their signatures, and the deed was done.

Then David Lindsay courteously thanked the priest and shook hands with him, leaving in his palm a very liberal fee.

Finally, he drew the arm of his bride under his own to lead her forth.

As he led her down the aisle, on their way out of the church, some whispered words among the three women who had witnessed their marriage, and who now followed close behind them, fell on his ears.

240“A runaway match, as sure as you are born, and the girl repents already. She looks like death, she does,” said one woman.

“She’s scared nearly out of her wits for fear her father or somebody will be after her,” said another.

“I declare I don’t know how any conscientious minister of the gospel ever can find it in his mind to marry a runaway couple—and such children as these are, too. I must say, I am astonished at Mr. O’Halloran!” added the third woman.

“Well, for my part,” recommenced the first, “if one of my daughters should be so lost to all sense of propriety as to go off with any young man, I should be exceedingly thankful to the first minister, or even magistrate, who should tie them lawfully together.”

“To be sure, there is something in that, which I never thought of before,” answered the caviler.

David Lindsay drew his trembling companion on faster, in order to escape hearing any more of these unpleasant comments.

He took her out and put her in the carriage, stepped in, and seated himself by her side and ordered the hack to drive back to the hotel.

“Gloria, dear Gloria, my own dearest lady,” he began, as he took one of her frozen hands.

“Don’t speak to me! Don’t touch me!” she exclaimed, snatching her hand from his gentle hold, pulling her veil over her face, and tucking her head down in a corner of the cushions.

“Ah! what have I done to offend you, lady?” he pleaded.

“Be silent, I say! And keep your hands to yourself, unless you wish to kill me! But you may do 241that one thing! You may kill me, if you like! I wish you would!”

“Great Heaven! Gloria, what is the matter with you?”

“I am crazy! crazy! I told you I was crazy! And if you do not leave me alone I shall go raving mad!” she wildly exclaimed, and then pushed her head down in the cushions again, as if she would shut out all sight of earth and heaven.

David Lindsay sank back in his seat and turned deadly pale as he asked himself the question:

What had he done to offend and alienate her? To fill her mind with such abhorrence of himself? He had obeyed her in everything. He had consecrated his life to her happiness. True, she was a rich heiress, and he was but a poor boy; yet, if their cases had been reversed, and he had been the wealthy man and she the poor girl, he felt that he would equally have consecrated his life to her. He loved her with his whole being, and since she had condescended to him, he had hoped finally to become more worthy of her, and to win her love; for deep down in his soul he felt the prophecy that he should become worthy of her—

“Worthy as a king.”
But ever since, at the priest’s command, he had offered her the bridegroom’s kiss, she had shrunk from him in loathing.

Was it possible after all, that the mind of his beloved was unbalanced? That her reason was deranged, and had been so at the time she had made her strange marriage proposal to him? Had he himself been culpably hasty, even criminally reckless, 242in his acceptance of her offered hand? Had he unconsciously taken advantage of a poor child’s lunacy to make her his wife?

Indeed, the present aspect of affairs looked as if this must be the case. And if so, what earthly amends could he make her? How atone for the deep wrong he had done her?

These were terrible questions, that he could in no way answer.

While they still tortured his soul, the carriage drew up before the hotel, and the coachman left his seat on the box and came down and opened the door.

Gloria’s face was still tucked down out of sight in the corner of the carriage.

“Come, lady, we have arrived,” the young bridegroom whispered, in a gentle and deprecating tone.

She pulled her veil down closer over her face, doubling it so that not a feature could be seen, and then allowed him to take her hand and assist her from the carriage.

David Lindsay, in his distress, forgot to pay the hackman and discharge the hack. But that functionary jogged the memory of his employer and received his own dues.

Then young Lindsay led his companion into the house and up to the ladies’ parlor, when she left his arm and hurried away by herself to a corner, where she sat down in a large chair and hid her head in its back cushions.

Meanwhile David Lindsay went down stairs and registered their names and engaged rooms.

When this was done he came back to the parlor, accompanied by a waiter with a couple of keys in his hand.

Leaving this man at the door, laden with the two 243traveling-bags which had been pointed out, David Lindsay approached Gloria and whispered:

“A waiter is here to take up your bag and show you to your room. Will you go now, and will you have some tea, or whatever you prefer, sent up to you?”

She did not answer by one word, but, shuddering, arose, peeped through a fold of her veil, and, seeing the waiter at the door, walked towards him.

The man nodded, and led the way to a small suite of rooms on the same floor, consisting of a little parlor, chamber and bath-room.

He opened these and put down the bags, and then struck a match and set fire to the kindlings already piled in the grates ready for ignition.

Having performed these duties he turned to the lady and inquired:

“Any more orders, madam?”

“Madam!” echoed the girl, with bitter scorn, though in so low a tone that the word was nearly inaudible. “No, I want nothing; but, yes, you may bring me a cup of tea. My throat is as parched as a desert.”

The waiter nodded and went out.

“Now, what have I done!” exclaimed Gloria, as she tore off her gloves, her hat, and her sack, and threw them angrily on the bed. “Now, what have I done! Oh, Marcel! I will never, never, no, NEVER forgive you for driving me to this pass! Oh! how I hate you! How I hate you for this, Marcel! And I hate David Lindsay! And I hate myself worse than all! My odious self! I hate everybody! And I wish everybody was dead! I do!” she cried, flinging herself down on the floor, and rolling and crying like a passionate child.

244It is of no use to repeat all her ravings.

David Lindsay was more than half right in his surmises, and Gloria was really more than half insane.

She was still rolling and crying on the carpet, when the shuffling steps of the waiter approaching the door, caused her to start up in time to answer his knock.

She placed herself behind the door, opened it, put out her hand and took the little tea-tray, without showing her own tear-stained face.

She drank the tea with eager thirst, and then sat down the empty cup and threw herself on the sofa.

“The cup that cheers,” and so forth, seemed to do her good, and perhaps her fit of hysterical weeping had temporarily exhausted itself, for she wept and raved no more, but lay, with her hands clasped over her face, in perfect stillness.

An hour later there was a knock at her door. She started up and opened it, and David Lindsay entered the room.

She recoiled to the farthest corner, and sat down and hid her head over the back of the chair.

“Do not shrink from me. Indeed I will not intrude my presence on you more than is absolutely necessary,” he began, in low and deprecating tones.

But she shuddered and shrank into herself, more fearfully than ever.

He sat down at some little distance from her, sighed heavily, because he could not help doing so, drew out a handkerchief from his pocket and wiped his forehead, which was beaded with a cold moisture, and paler now than it had ever been in his life before.

“I only wished to discover, if indeed I can do so, 245through you, whether you really knew what you were about when you came to me on the beach, when you accompanied me to the city here, and when you gave me your hand in the church?”

These words acted upon the motionless form with more power than a galvanic battery on a corpse.

She sprang from her seat to the middle of the floor and, confronting him with a wild and agonized face, she exclaimed:

“No, I did not know what I was doing! I was mad—mad—mad! and you ought to have known that I was mad to have done such an unheard-of thing. Oh, David Lindsay, if you ever loved me, have pity on me now and leave me! If you have a spark of mercy in your soul, grant my prayer, and leave me. If you have the least instinct of honor, do not insist on keeping the position that my act has given you. If you are a man and not a monster, and not a maniac, leave me and never let me see your face again.”

He gazed on her in anguish and amazement. Then he arose from his chair, crossed over to the fireplace, and stood upon the corner of the hearth, with his elbow leaning on the mantel-shelf, and his hand supporting his forehead. His eyes were fixed upon the floor, his face was white as death, and looked older by a dozen years than it should be. Yet he was very firm and patient. Boy as he was—but a few months past his twenty-first birthday—he could never descend to the weakness of pleading his suit, and playing upon the sympathies of his beloved, as older and wiser men have done, and still do. No. If her love could not approve him, her pity should not accept him. He adored her with his whole soul. He had married her, yet he would 246not persecute her with an unwelcome suit. But neither must he leave her now, in her childishness and helplessness. He must see her in some place of safety, and under some proper protection.

Such were the thoughts that passed rapidly through his mind, as he stood on the corner of the hearth, with his elbows resting on the mantelpiece, his head leaning on his hand, and his eyes fixed on the floor.

“David Lindsay, will you act the part of an honorable man, and leave me at once and forever, or will you stay here and drive me furious?” she demanded again, in a voice of anguish.

“Patience for one moment, lady. I will leave you—as far as the next room—and never cross this threshold again. This chamber shall be your sanctuary. I will occupy the parlor. But I cannot leave you alone and unprotected in a strange city, dear. I must be on hand to take care of you, if needful. You are frightened now, Gloria. There is no need to be. I will not intrude. But we must have time to think what we shall next do.”

He spoke very gently.

And now she was weeping aloud.

He left the room at once.

“Oh! what a selfish and cruel wretch I am! What a change has come over me! I have turned into a demon! I must be a demon to hate those who love me! To hate them for loving me! Oh, I wish I were dead! I wish I had never lived!” she sobbed, throwing herself down upon the sofa in an agony of self-reproach and self-loathing.

David Lindsay walked up and down in the adjoining room, his steps noiseless on the soft carpet. He was sorely perplexed in mind and distressed at 247heart, only certain of two obligations resting upon him—not to intrude on her privacy, yet not to desert her in her weakness and distraction. She was but a child, he felt, a child who had grown up under very peculiar circumstances, so that she must not be judged as ordinary children or young girls. And what a heavenly child she had been! How full of love, how free from selfishness! Now she seemed indeed to have been driven into a state akin to insanity. Had he, her old playmate, who loved her better than his own life, had any hand in this? He could not think so. He, with all his honesty of inquiry, could not see any other way than that they had taken to save her from an odious marriage, which her religious faith would have condemned even if her own heart had not revolted against it—a marriage into which she could not have been compelled, of course, but into which she might have been, through her pity, persuaded. Now she was safe, at least from that danger.

Meanwhile, what was now his duty to her?

Not to intrude on her, and not to abandon her, certainly.

But afterwards?

He now remembered all that she had told him, while they sat together on the steamboat deck, concerning her father’s will, and how, on her attaining the age of eighteen, or on her marriage, she was to enter upon the possession of her estate, and the authority of her guardian was to cease; that this will had been made in Washington city, and recorded in the office of the Register of Wills.

He determined to go thither and examine the document for himself.

He rapped gently at Gloria’s door.

248“What do you want?” she inquired, in smothered tones.

“I am going out for an hour. Shall I send any one to you?”

“No, thanks; I want nothing.”

He turned away and went down stairs and out of the house, and bent his steps to the City Hall.

On inquiring of the proper officers he obtained a view of the folio containing the record of the testament he sought. Having read it over, he thought he saw his way clearly enough towards placing his young bride in her own house, surrounded by her own servants, and safe from any annoyance from her late guardian. But he concluded that it would be better to take a lawyer’s opinion.

He had noticed, as he came along that morning, almost every front basement on the north side of Louisiana Avenue, opposite the City Hall, to be the office of some attorney-at-law.

He therefore knew where to go to look for one.

He left the building and crossed the street, but went into at least a dozen places without finding any one disengaged. At length, however, he paused before the last and plainest on the block, which bore the sign: “Patrick McLoughlin, Attorney and Counsellor at Law.”

He entered a shabby little room, where a very young and briefless lawyer sat at a dusty desk, and seemed to have no heavier labor on hand than the perusal of the morning paper.

To this young fellow David Lindsay introduced himself, and stated his case, omitting only two circumstances—that the marriage proposal had come from the lady herself, and that immediately after the ceremony she had repulsed him. The knowledge 249of these unusual facts was, however, not at all essential to the right understanding of the situation.

The young Irishman, with all the ardor and frankness of his race, heartily congratulated his client on having so successfully run away with an heiress; for that was the light in which he viewed the affair. He made no pretense of being busy, but announced himself ready to attend Mr. Lindsay at once. They crossed over together to the City Hall, and went to the Registrar’s office, where McLoughlin read the recorded will, while David Lindsay stood by. Then he closed the folio with a rap, clapped his client on the shoulder, and exclaimed:

“That’s all right! Take the lady home to the finest house she possesses, my dear fellow, and tell the old guardian, if he comes bothering around, to go to the divil; his consent was not necessary!”

Not very elegant language to couch a lawyer’s opinion in; but McLoughlin has improved since then, and now you would hardly find a more dignified man at the Washington bar than he is.

The young lawyer thought he had found a “big bonanza” in this fortunate young fellow, who had married an heiress, and so he charged him fifty dollars for his advice. (He would charge five hundred for the same service now, bless you.)

David Lindsay paid the fee without demur; but he was appalled, it reduced his funds so alarmingly low. He had left home with only two hundred dollars—the accumulated savings of ten or twelve years. Traveling expenses, and clergymen’s and lawyer’s fees had reduced it to less than a hundred already, and this circumstance warned him that he must lose no time in stopping expenses at the hotel, 250but must take Gloria to her home, while yet he had the means of doing so—for he was resolved that he would not draw upon her resources.

He took leave of young McLoughlin and walked rapidly towards their hotel.

He went up stairs to their private parlor and rapped at her door.

“Well?” she said, in a subdued voice.

“Will you come out, dear, and let me speak to you?”

“Yes,” she murmured, in a low tone; and presently she appeared, closed the door behind her, and sat down on the nearest chair. She did not wait for him to speak, but, with a dry sob, commenced:

“David Lindsay, I am a lost spirit—an evil spirit. I cannot help that. I have treated you unpardonably. I cannot help that, either—I——”

“Do not reproach yourself, dear. There is no thought in my heart that reproaches you,” he answered, gently, as he stood with his back to the window and with his eyes cast down, so that she should not see the trouble that he could not entirely banish from his face.

“Ah, but I do and must. I feel how wickedly, yes, how basely I have acted towards you, David Lindsay, and am still acting, and must still act; but I cannot help it! I cannot help anything. We must part, David Lindsay.”

“I know it, dear,” he answered, in as steady tones as he could command, for he knew her sympathetic nature, and knew how much she would suffer from compassion if she should see him suffer. “I know we must part. It would be scarcely natural, scarcely possible, that you should love me, to live with me. The ceremony of this morning must go for 251nothing, so far as I am concerned, but just this—to be a shield and defence about you, to protect you from your guardian’s suit and from your own heart’s weakness—that is all. When you are older and stronger, and able to do without it, the empty ceremony of this morning can be set aside, annulled—for, Gloria, the marriage rites, so sacred between souls that are already one, was but an idle and empty ceremony between you and me, and is good for nothing but a temporary defence to your helplessness. It has given me a husband’s right to protect you before the world, Gloria, but I shall use it only as a brother. As a brother, I will escort you to your own home, Gloria, and establish you there.”

“And then?” she inquired, in a voice scarcely above her breath.

“Then, dear, I will bid you good-bye, when I see you safe.”

CHAPTER XIX
LOVE WITHOUT SELF-LOVE
Stand up! Look below!
It is my life at thy feet I throw,
To step with into light and joy!
Not a power of life but I’ll employ—
Browning.
“Gryphynshold! Take me to Gryphynshold! that is the most remote of all the manors left me by my father. Take me there, for I wish to go as far as possible from all the people I ever knew before!” 252said Gloria, in reply to David Lindsay’s suggestion that he should convey her to some one of her houses as to a place of refuge.

They were still sitting together, where we left them, in the private parlor of the hotel, on the afternoon of the day of their marriage.

They were now conversing in a quiet and friendly manner on the subject of their approaching departure, for they had resolved to leave Washington the same evening.

Gloria was much more composed now than she had ever been since the hour of her marriage; for David Lindsay had assured her that he should never presume on the position she had given him, even to enter her presence uninvited.

She had, from their childhood up, always loved and trusted him, and now that he had given her this promise, she implicitly believed him, and dismissed all her disquieting doubts.

David Lindsay, meanwhile, magnanimously repressed all exhibition of the bitter mortification and sorrow he experienced. He knew his little playmate too well to blame her. He knew her better than any one else in the world— better than she knew herself. The poor little hunted and helpless fawn had flown to him for refuge, and he would succor her in the way she pleased, not in the way he had wished.

She had chosen her place of refuge, and he would take her there.

“Gryphynshold,” he slowly repeated, when she had named the selected point of destination. “What a savage and gloomy name, dear! Where is that?”

“The name is not more gloomy and savage than 253the place, I fear. It is situated in the extreme southwestern part of Virginia, on or near the point of juncture with North Carolina and Tennessee. It is said to be the most ancient building in all that region of country; it was erected in a gorge of the Iron Mountains by an eccentric and misanthropical Welshman named Dyvyd-ap-Gryphyn, said by some annalists to have been an outlaw in his own country and a refugee in this. However that might have been, or whether he had any legal right to the land or not, there, in the most terrific yawning abyss of the mountain range, he built a rude stronghold of heavy rock and ponderous timber, and called it Gryphynshold; and there he lived, supporting himself by hunting and fishing, like any other savage denizen of the wilderness, and there at length he married an Indian girl of the Cherokee tribe. From that marriage sprang the race of Gryphyns—a proud, surly, ferocious race of men, the bane of each other, and the terror of their neighborhood.”

“It is to be devoutly hoped that they were not a very numerous tribe,” said David Lindsay.

“No. I have heard Aunt Agrippina say that there was never more than one child born of any marriage, and that was always a son. Strange, wasn’t it, from generation to generation, only one son to succeed his father?”

“Very strange; yet it precluded all possibility of law-suits among the heirs. But how came this ill-omened property into your father’s hands, my dear little lady?” inquired David Lindsay, in a playful tone, assumed to hide the heartache that was torturing him.

“Oh, it was a dreadful, dreadful story. I do not know the details of it. But Mr. Dyvyd Gryphyn, 254the last descendant of the Welsh outlaw who founded the family, seems to have been a demon in human form, more haughty, surly, cruel and furious than any of his evil predecessors, yet withal as demoniacally beautiful and fascinating as Lucifer, Son of the Morning. After the death of his father, who was killed in a tavern broil, and of his mother, who dropped dead of heart disease on hearing the news—for all these handsome and ferocious demons seemed to have been fondly loved by their unfortunate wives—Dyvyd Gryphyn left Gryphynshold on a tour of Europe. After an absence of three years he returned home, bringing with him a young woman, said to have been fairer than the fairest lily, more blooming than the rosiest rose. He loved her with the surly, jealous, cruel love of his nature and the nature of his fathers, which seems to be not so much love as a devouring and consuming fire, the curse and ruin of all upon whom it chanced to fall. And she loved him with that fatality of devotion which was the doom of all the women ever chosen by the ill men of the race. She was content to bury herself with him in that savage solitude, remote from all human kind; yet he did not seclude himself, but rode forth to distant towns and villages, and remained away for days and weeks together. Sometimes he would bring a party of men home with him, and they would hunt or fish all day, and carouse all night. But he never let any of them see his hidden beauty, who lived as isolated in her dreary prison as any enchanted princess in a fairy castle, until one night, in the midst of a midnight orgie, when his reckless companions were all mad with drink, and he himself was maddest of all, he sent and summoned her to the feast. The poor 255thing was not a Queen Vashti, so she obeyed the drunken mandate, and came down. I do not know what happened there—what she was forced to see and bear and hear—but that she was grieved, shocked and terrified beyond all endurance is certain, for as soon as she could break away and escape from the fiendish crew, she fled to the top of the house and hid herself, in a state of delirious terror.”

Gloria paused and shuddered.

“What became of the poor young woman?” inquired David Lindsay.

“I do not know. No one knows what finally became of her. The party of revellers broke up the next morning and Dyvyd Gryphyn rode with them to the next town and remained absent for a day, during which the poor little soul at home grew quieter.”

Again Gloria paused, and David Lindsay inquired:

“And was there a reconciliation between this ill-sorted pair?”

“I do not know. I never even heard whether he saw her again on the morning after the orgie, or whether he took leave of her before setting out on his journey with the revellers. She grew very quiet in his absence.”

Once more Gloria sank into silence. Once more the young man prompted her to continue, saying:

“Well, and when this demon of Gryphynshold came back?”

“Oh, David Lindsay, what next happened is so horrible—so horrible that I shrink from speaking of it,” she said, with a shudder.

“Then do not, lady dear,” he answered, gently.

256“Oh, but I must! It is on my mind and it must out! I have heard that he came back in the middle of a January night—a bitter cold, freezing night. His face, they say, was as black as a thunder cloud, and his eyes flashed like lightning. Without deigning a word to one of the servants, who came to attend him, he strode at once to the chamber of his poor young victim and ordered her to get up and dress herself, for she should leave his house that night!”

“What an unheard-of monster!” exclaimed David Lindsay.

“Oh, what a wretched maniac! for no man in his senses would have acted with such causeless cruelty. In vain the poor creature pleaded to know what she had done to offend him. He only cursed her and threatened to throw her from the window unless she dressed and departed at once. In vain she wept and begged to stay till morning. He told her, with many fierce curses, that by this delay she only trifled with his temper and her own life. Oh! oh, David Lindsay, he thrust that delicate creature forth in the freezing air of that bitter January night to perish on the mountains!” exclaimed Gloria, who had forgotten all her own troubles in recalling this horrible story.

“And did she so perish?” mournfully inquired the young man.

“I do not know. Some weeks from that night a party of hunters found the dead body of a woman on the mountain; but the birds of prey had found it first and it was unrecognizable! Oh, it is all too, too hideous! It was supposed to be the body of Dyvyd Gryphyn’s victim, and, as she was never heard of afterwards, it probably was hers.”

257“And what became of the madman? You were right in calling him a maniac, Gloria, for such he certainly must have been. You said that he was the last owner of Gryphynshold, therefore he must be dead. How did he die?”

“Ah, like nearly all his fierce race! A violent death! On the very day after he had thrust his poor little white slave out into the winter night, he himself fell in a duel with one of the reckless companions of his demoniac orgies of that terrible night when he commanded the hidden beauty to come into their abhorrent presence.”

“Killed in a duel at last,” muttered David Lindsay to himself.

“Yes, and with him perished the last of the evil race of the Gryphyns of Gryphynshold.”

“How came your father to purchase such an ill-omened piece of property?”

“It was advertised to be sold for taxes. Then an heir turned up in a Welsh baronet, who spelled his name in the more modern and civilized manner of G-r-i-f-f-i-n, but who was of the same original Welsh stock, the next of kin, and the heir-at-law, though a very, very, very distant cousin. This gentleman did not want this mountain property, and so, as soon as his claim to it was established, he threw the estate into the market, and my father bought it.”

“What could have induced Count de la Vera to buy such a place?”

“He was looking around for opportunities to invest his money in Virginia lands, being determined to become a citizen of the United States. He thought the Iron Mountain must be rich in the ore that gave it its name, and rich in other ores as well; and that this would be a source of great wealth to his 258wife and children in the future, if not immediately to himself; for remember that my mother was living at the time of the purchase.”

“After what you have told me, dear, I question whether that would be a desirable residence for any one, least of all for you,” said David Lindsay, gravely.

“Oh, yes, it would. I particularly wish to go there. Ah, I know not why, but the very savageness of the place attracts me!” exclaimed Gloria.

“Who is in charge of the house? Shall we find it habitable? Will there be accommodations for you?”

“Oh, yes, I suppose so,” said Gloria, answering the last question first; “the place should be kept up; my father purchased it just as it was, with slaves, stock, carriage and horses, implements, furniture, and everything. He even retained the hired white overseer and the housekeeper who had been in the service of the last owner. I know that Uncle Marcel used to receive their accounts and pay their wages twice every year.”

“So you have decided to go to Gryphynshold?”

“I have determined to go there,” said Gloria, firmly.

“Then I must get a map and trace out our course as well as I can, and afterwards inquire about stages.”

“I can tell you that; for once during our summer holiday trips, Marcel and I, being in this city, planned to go and take a look at my mountain stronghold, as he called it. So we left Washington by the six P. M. stage-coach for Winchester; thence to Staunton, and thence to the Greenbriar White Sulphur Springs; but there we found the place so 259attractive that we went no farther. So I know that we must commence our journey by the stage that leaves here at six o’clock in the evening. What time is it now? Let me see,” she said, as she consulted her diamond-studded little gold watch. “It is half-past one. Now, please ring and order a carriage. I must go out and buy a trunk, a work-box, a writing-desk, a dressing-case, clothes, needles and thread, stationery, combs and brushes, and all such necessaries of a girl’s life, before going into that remote mountain wilderness. And at the same time we can stop at the stage office and take our places.”

The young man answered by ringing the bell, and when the waiter appeared he gave the requisite order.

Gloria went in her chamber to put on her sack and hat.

The carriage was soon announced, and in five minutes afterwards the young pair were rolling along the avenue, Gloria looking out from the window to watch for the signs of the shops she wished to visit.

Presently she stopped the carriage before the door of the only general dealer and outfitter in ladies’ ready-made garments that the city then afforded.

David Lindsay left her there and went to book their places in the Winchester stage-coach.

It took Gloria three full hours to drive from place to place and collect all she wanted. She found them all without leaving the avenue, however. She had the trunk put on behind the carriage and the goods all piled within it, to save time by taking them to the hotel herself. Finally she reached her rooms at about five o’clock and spent half an hour in diligent packing.

260David Lindsay then came to take her down to dinner, which they had scarcely finished before the stage-coach called to claim them.

In those slow days stage-coaches did not start exactly on time, as railway trains are supposed to do now. I have known a stage-coach to wait twenty minutes while John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay leisurely finished their breakfast before taking their seats to leave Washington at the end of a session of Congress.

Our young pair did not keep the coach waiting. They soon had their luggage brought down and bestowed in the boot, and soon after found themselves comfortably seated, the only passengers except two returning country dealers who had been East to purchase goods for the spring trade. This class indeed formed the bulk of travelers at this season of the year.

It was dark when the coach started on its long and wearisome journey.

There was neither moon nor stars out, for the sky was quite overclouded, so that there was no temptation for the passengers to gaze abroad as the stage-coach rattled over the newly macadamized avenue on through Washington, Georgetown, Tennalleytown to Rockville, where it changed horses, and where one of the travelers left them and another one took his place.

When the coach started again, Gloria curled herself up in her corner and tried to go to sleep, for she was in no way interested in the conversation concerning the dullness of the trade and the unpunctuality of debtors which the country merchants had forced upon her companion.

Rocked, or fatigued, by the rolling of the cumbersome 261old coach, Gloria was soon fast asleep, and she slept through the whole night, undisturbed except by the stoppage at the post-houses to change horses.

At sunrise they reached Leesburg, where they stopped to breakfast and to change coaches, taking the Winchester coach.

They rode all day through the most beautiful passes of the lesser Blue Ridge and reached Winchester in the Valley in time for an early tea.

Here again they were to change coaches and take the Staunton stage.

David Lindsay would have prevailed on Gloria to stop and rest till morning, but she was determined to pursue her journey.

They had but an hour here before the starting of the Staunton coach, and Gloria made the most of her time to refresh herself by a wash and prepare comfortably for her second night’s ride.

After an excellent tea, for which their wintry day’s journey had given them a keen appetite, the young travelers took their seats in the Staunton coach and recommenced their journey.

And this second night, poor, disappointed David Lindsay slept as soundly in his seat as did the willful beauty, Gloria, in hers.

Not even the stoppage of the coach to change horses, amid the flashing lights of the roadside post-houses, or the getting off of old passengers and climbing in of new ones succeeded in arousing them, for if disturbed they would draw a long breath, slightly change position, and drop asleep again.

They never opened their eyes until the stage-coach stopped at Woodstock, when the tumultuous 262getting out of their fellow-passengers at once fully awakened them.

Then they saw that the sun was at least an hour high, and that the horses were being taken from the coach before a spacious hotel in the principal street of a country town.

“What place is this?” drowsily inquired David Lindsay.

“Woodstock, sir, where we change horses and get breakfast,” answered the guard.

David handed his sleepy companion from the inside of the heavy old vehicle, and led her into a pleasant parlor, where their fellow-travelers were already gathered around a large, open fireplace, in which a glorious hickory wood fire was blazing. The party there made room for the young lady.

But she did not stay with them long. A neat colored girl came up to her and respectfully whispered the question as to whether she would not like to go to her room before breakfast.

Decidedly Gloria would like to do that very thing. So she arose and followed the girl, who lifted and carried the young lady’s traveling-bag to a spacious chamber over the parlor, with white dimity window-curtains and bed-spread, and a fine fire blazing up the open chimney-place.

The girl supplied the young traveler with warm and cold water, fresh towels, and every other requisite for the toilet—informing her, meantime, that she had half an hour before breakfast.

Gloria was glad. She sent for her trunk to be brought up, and had a thoroughly refreshing toilet, with a full change of dress.

Then, as fresh as if she had risen from a comfortable bed, instead of coming out of a lumbering 263stage-coach, she went down and joined her fellow-travelers at a delicious breakfast of coffee, hot rolls, buckwheat cakes, venison, quails, ham and every dainty of the season.

After the breakfast, half their fellow-passengers entered with them into the Staunton coach. (The other half had diverged in various directions.)

Their way now lay down the great valley of Virginia, with the Blue Ridge mountains on the east and the Alleghanies on the west—a paradise of beauty in the summer, and a fine country even when covered with snow, as it was now, in mid-winter.

By nightfall they reached Staunton.

Gloria was much fatigued, and again David Lindsay implored her to rest for one night.

But Gloria, willful as ever, was bent upon going on until she should reach the end of her journey. That extreme bourne, the “Hold” in the Iron Mountains, on the confines of three States, possessed a weird attraction like the lodestone, and drew her on and on.

“It is like a place in a dream—a place in a nightmare—but it fascinates me all the same,” she answered to the expostulations of David Lindsay.

After a substantial supper, finished with strong coffee, the travelers who were to go farther took seats in the changed coach, and began the third night’s journey towards Lexington.

Again, as before, the two young people slept throughout the ride, only, being still more fatigued, they slept more soundly than ever, and only awakened when, at sunrise, the coach drew up at the hotel in the main street of the little town of Lexington, 264and their fellow passengers began to climb over them in getting out.

Here they stopped for an hour. A refreshing wash, a substantial breakfast, and a brisk walk up and down the village street, restored the strength and spirit of the wearied young pair, so that they re-entered the lumbering old coach without any remaining oppression from fatigue, and well prepared to enjoy the day’s ride through the varied scenery of hill and dale, woods, waters, fields, farms, towns and hamlets that diversified the valley that lay between the two great ranges of mountains.

Towards evening the valley narrowed and the mountains rose until the road seemed to be approaching a gorge.

While there was yet light enough, David Lindsay drew a pocket map from his breast and began to examine it.

“If our journey takes us through that yawning chasm, I think we had better stop for the night at the first tavern we come to,” suggested the young man, thinking more of the safety of his companion than of his own.

“No! where the coach can go, we can go, night or day,” persisted Gloria.

It was dusk when they reached the gap they had seen so far before them. There was a great stone building on a river that broke through the mountains at this point. The water reflected the high precipices and the buildings with their gleaming lights. The place was a combination of tavern, post-house, mill and ferry.

Here they stopped to change horses and get supper, after which the coach, with its passengers, 265freight and horses, was ferried across the river to the other side, and then it took the road beneath the shelter of the snow-clad mountains, and kept it, plodding along slowly for the rest of the night.

But we must not dwell too long on this picturesque journey.

CHAPTER XX
GRYPHYNSHOLD
But there no more shall human voice
Be heard to rage—lament—rejoice—
The last sad note that swelled the gale
Was woman’s wildest funeral wail.
Byron.
From this point, however, they had left the lovely landscape of the valley and entered as by a natural gate into the wild mountain scenery, that, as they went on, grew wilder, more dreary and desolate.

They were two more days and nights on the road, stopping at irregular intervals to change horses at wayside post-houses, located just where it was possible to put them, or to breakfast, dine and sup at roadside taverns or little village hotels, until at the close of the fifth day from starting on their wearisome journey, they reached a ferry on the banks of a narrow, deep and rapid river, on the opposite side of which arose a lofty range of dark, cedar-covered mountains.

Here their stage journey ended.

They left the coach, had their baggage taken, and entered the ferry-house.

266The coach, after changing horses, went on its way.

Gloria and David Lindsay found themselves in a homely parlor, with bare walls and bare floor, a few flag-bottomed chairs and a pine table. The only ornaments were a defaced looking-glass between the windows and a framed picture of old-fashioned sampler-work representing a willow-tree over a tombstone, hung over the mantelpiece.

It was, however, heated by a roaring fire of great cedar logs, for cedar was the most plentiful wood in that mountain region, and it was lighted by two tall tallow-dips in iron candlesticks.

David Lindsay drew forward a chair and placed it before the fire for his weary companion, and then went out to find the landlord, ferryman, or some other responsible party.

After an absence of a few moments he came back, and said:

“Now, dear, I have two plans to propose to you. Choose between them. Mr. Cummings, the landlord here, has no conveyance except a heavy wagon drawn by mules, which he says is the safest sort for these mountain roads, and in which he is willing to send us on to Gryphynshold either to-night or to-morrow morning. The accommodations here are very rude and plain, as you see. You may judge what the upper rooms are by this, which I suppose is the best. Now it is for you to decide whether to go on to-night or to stay here and rest till morning and take the daylight for your journey to Gryphynshold.”

“Oh, let us go on at once! Where the mules can take the wagon, surely we can go,” promptly replied Gloria.

267David Lindsay went out and gave the order. His exit was followed by the entrance of a colored girl, who respectfully invited the young lady to go up into a bedroom where she could lay off her wraps and refresh herself while the supper and the wagon were getting ready.

Gloria willingly followed her, and took the benefit of all her offered services.

Then, feeling much better, she slipped a piece of money in the poor girl’s hand and went down stairs, where an excellent supper awaited them.

Whatever the mental troubles of the young pair might be, the long journey over the snow-clad and frozen roads, and through the pure, exhilarating air of mid-winter had given them fine, healthy appetites, and they both did full justice to the coffee, corn-bread and venison steaks that were set before them.

Immediately after supper they entered the heavy wagon, into which their luggage had already been placed, and settled themselves to continue their journey to Gryphynshold.

“Mind, Tubal,” called the landlord to his negro driver, “you take the lower road! It is the longest, but it is the safest.”

“Yes, sar,” responded the darkey.

“And when you get to the Devil’s Backbreaker be sure to jump off and lead the mules all the way up, or there’ll be an accident. Do you mind?”

“Yes, sar.”

“And when you come to Sinking Creek, be certain to look out for the water-post, to see if it is low enough to ford.”

“Yes, sar.”

“And when you get up to Peril Ledge get off and 268lead the beasts again; and mind you be very careful! I don’t want another broken neck broughten back here for a crowner’s quest.”

“No, sar.”

“Now, then, start, and mind what I tell you.”

“Yes, sar,” said Tubal, and as he slowly set his mules in motion, he muttered to himself: “’Tain’t de dangers ob goin’ dere to old Grippinwolf—omphe! no! I don’t mind goin’ dere, but as to stayin’ dere all night to res’ de mules—no, sar!—not Tubal!”

“What are you talking about, old man?” inquired David Lindsay.

But by this time they had reached the edge of the river, and Tubal’s whole attention was engaged in driving his mules on to the great flat ferry-boat, upon which stood four men with very long poles to push it over.

Nothing more was said until after they had reached the other side and Tubal had driven the wagon off the boat on to a road running between the front of the precipice and the river.

“What is the matter with old Gryphynshold that you would not stay all night in the place?” again questioned David Lindsay, whose interest in the ancient house had been deeply excited by the story of the last owner.

“What de matter long ob Grippinwolf, you ax? Now, look here, young marster, I dunno who yer is, nor what yer arter comin’ up here to Grippinwolf, whar no decent Christian hasn’t been visitin’ in de memory ob man! But you jes’ take a fool’s advice an’ turn right square roun’ an’ go right straight back whar yer come from. Don’t keep on to Grippinwolf,” said the old man, solemnly.

269“Why shouldn’t we go on? What is the matter with Gryphynshold, I ask you again?” inquired David.

“Debbil’s de matter wid it, young marster, jes’ de debbil! Not as I’d mind dat so much, if it war on’y de debbil, ’cause we read so much about him in de catechism dat he feels like a ole acquaintance ob ourn—natural like—on’y we don’t want to fall in his hands. No, I don’t mind him so much; but dere’s heap wuss dan de debbil as ails old Grippinwolf.”

“What is it, then?” inquired David, interested, in spite of his better reason.

The old negro paused, as if to give full effect to his words, and then solemnly replied:

“Dead people!”

“Dead people!” echoed David Lindsay, in amazement.

“Ooome!” groaned the old man.

“How can the dead trouble the place?” inquired the young man.

“Ooome!” groaned the negro.

“What do they do? They lie quietly in their graves, do they not?”

“Ooome! Hush, honey! I wish dey did!”

“What do they do, then?”

Again the negro paused to give full effect to his words, as he mysteriously replied:

“Dey walks!”

“Walks!”

“Yes, honey, de dead people walks in Grippinwolf—walks so continual dat dey won’t let anybody else lib dere.”

“Why, Mrs. Brent, the housekeeper, lives there!” 270exclaimed Gloria, putting in her voice for the first time.

“What say, honey?” inquired the negro.

“I say the housekeeper, Mrs. Brent, lives there.”

“Who? Her?” exclaimed Tubal, in such a tone of scornful denial that Gloria hastened to add:

“She does live there, does she not?”

“Ole mistress lib in Grippinwolf? Ooome! Yer better jes’ ax her to lib dere, dat’s all!”

“Then the housekeeper does not live in the house, if I understand you aright?” said Gloria, in unpleasant surprise.

“Hi, what I tell you, honey? Nobody can’t lib dere ’mong de dead people!”

“What nonsense you talk, old man. Some one must live there to take care of the house.”

“Well, den, dey don’t, young mist’ess, an’ I tell yer so good! De ghosts has ’jected everybody out ob dat house, and dey has had it all to deirselves dis twenty years or more.”

“Then my guardian has been completely deceived! He has been paying a salary to a housekeeper who has abandoned her duties. And if the house is deserted, as he says, what shall we do, David Lindsay?” inquired Gloria, in a tone of indignant distress and perplexity.

“Turn right roun’ an’ go straight back whar yer come from! You do dat while times is good. Dat’s de ’wice what I gibbed yer fust, an’ dat’s de ’wice what I gib yer last,” said Tubal, answering for his passenger.

“Is there no one on the place to receive us, then?” inquired David Lindsay.

“Oh, dere’s de oberseer, in his own house, ’bout quarter ob a mile dis side ob Grippinwolf Hall; but 271Lor’, de people ’bout here don’t call de place Grippinwolf no more—dey calls it Ghost Hall.”

“Where does the housekeeper live?” inquired David Lindsay.

“Oh, she—she libs at de gate lodge. She moved dere when she was dejected by de ghosts.”

“Now, Gloria, we have not ridden more than two miles from the ferry. What would you like to do? Turn back, as the old man advises, and stop at the ferry for the up coach and take our places for the North, and for some other home of yours more convenient and attractive, or go on to this?” earnestly inquired David Lindsay.

“Oh, go on to Gryphynshold, by all means. Since I have heard the supernatural tales told by this old man, which well supplement the horrible stories told me by Aunt Agrippina, I am more than ever determined to go on to Gryphynshold. The overseer can certainly give you a bed in his cottage for to-night, while I shall stay at the gate lodge with the housekeeper——”

“And as for me,” put in the old negro, “soon’s ebber I gets to dat same gate-house, which won’t be ’fore midnight, I gwine to lop you all right down dere an’ turn right round and dribe my mules straight home ag’in. All de money in dis univarse wouldn’t hire ole Uncle Tubal to take up his lodgings ’long ob de dead people! Leastways, not till I’s dead myself!”

“You can do as you please,” said David; “but tell us what gave rise to these ridiculous stories?”

“What rised ’em? Why, de ghosts rised ’em! De ghost ob dat ole Satan’s demon son, Dyvyd Grippinwolf, who murdered de booful young ooman as he stole away from her friends an’ fotch to his 272own Debbil’s den up yonder. His unquiet ghost rages up and down all night, rushin’ t’rough de halls and up de stairs, a slammin’ and a bangin’ ob de doors like a ravin’ mad bull. And no bolts or bars ebber strong enough to keep him out. Dat’s de one what tarrifies people clean out’n deir senses, young marster, I tell yer good.”

“Is old Dyvyd Gryphyn’s ghost the only hobgoblin that haunts the hold?” inquired David Lindsay, with a smile.

“Lor’, no! Why, dere’s crowds of ’em sometimes. All de wicked, wiolent, furious old Gryphyns as ebber libbed dere—which none ob ’em ebber died in deir beds, yer know—all ob dem died wiolent deaths—holds high jubilee-la! dere ebbery night ’long ob all de debbils out’n de pit! Hush, honey! Dat ole house up dere is de werry mouf ob de black pit ob Satan! An’ ef anybody was to ’xamine, I reckon dey’d find de deep, dry well in de cellar was nuffin less dan a way down into dat same black pit ob Satan; and all debbils do come up an’ down it to hold high jubilee-la! along with all de wicked, furious ole ghosts ob de Gryphyns!”

“Has any one ever seen any of these dreadful orgies?” inquired David Lindsay, with an incredulous laugh.

“You may laugh, young marster,” said the old negro, in an offended tone; “but ef yer persists in goin’ an’ stayin’ at dat ole debbil’s den, you’ll laugh on t’other side ob your mouf, I tell yer good.”

“Has any one seen any of these horrible spectres?” reiterated David Lindsay.

“Hi! What I tell yer? Didn’t Mr. Oberseer Cummings and Mrs. Housekeeper Brent bofe see an’ hear dem? An’ didn’t de ghost deject dem out’n 273de house? An’ I, my own self, wid my own eyes, a comin’ from de mill one night, passed in sight ob dat ole ghostly house. De night was dark as pitch! Dere was nyder moor nor stars, an’ I couldn’t hab seed nuffin only for my eyes gettin’ use to de dark, yer know. An’ I did look up to de ole ghost house, standin’ way up dere on de mountain, straight an’ black, against de dark sky, an’ I couldn’t see no windows fust, but all of a sudden I saw all de windows in de front ob de black looking house!”

With this culmination of horror, old Tubal made an awful pause.

But as no one made the expected exclamation of astonishment the old man inquired:

“Now, how does yer fink I saw all de windows in dat dark, deserted house on dat dark night?”

“Heaven knows!” said David Lindsay.

“Want me to tell you?”

“Yes.”

“By de light ob de ghosts’ eyes!”

“What!”

“By de light ob de ghosts’ eyes, sure as I’m a libbin’ sinner! Dere was a ghost at every window, an’ at some windows dere was two or free, bofe men an’ women ghosts. An’ every one ob deir eyes was a shining like an inward fire an’ lightin’ up all de windows!”

Again the narrator made an awful pause.

Gloria was evidently impressed by his story. Not so David Lindsay, who quietly asked: “Had you taken anything to drink that evening, old man?”

“Who? Me? Don’t ’sult me, young marster; I’m a Son of Tempunce, an’ a brudder in de Bethelum 274Methody Meetin’,” said the old man, in dignified resentment.

“I beg your pardon, I really do,” replied David Lindsay, with frank courtesy.

“I did gib yer de bes’ wice in my power, not to go nigh dat debbil’s den! But course you’ll do as yer likes. No offence, young marster.”

“Why, you see this lady is fully determined to go on there,” David Lindsay explained.

“Yes, I am,” added Gloria. “All that I hear of that old house only serves to confirm my resolution to go on and see it. We can find accommodations with the overseer or the housekeeper for this one night, David Lindsay, and then to-morrow we will have the old stronghold of ghosts, goblins and devils thrown wide open to the light of heaven, and see if we cannot exorcise them. We will make a thorough investigation, David Lindsay, for I have quite resolved to take up my abode, for the present at least, in that goblin-haunted house, and I feel that, in doing so, I am right.”

CHAPTER XXI
GHOST HALL
There is so foul a rumor in the air,
The shadow of a presence so atrocious,
How could a human creature enter there,
Even the most ferocious?
Thomas Hood.
“Well, young marster, the road turns right here,” said the driver, drawing up his mules.

275David Lindsay looked out of the wagon.

On his left lay the dark river, with the snow-covered valley beyond it.

On his right towered the stupendous precipice of the Iron Mountain, cleft down from summit to base, showing a ravine of wildly shattered rocks, bristling with clumps of stunted cedar trees, all dimly seen in the darkness of the winter night.

“You don’t call that a pass, do you?” inquired David Lindsay, incredulously, peering out into the gloom.

“Dat’s de road, young marster, sure’s yer born. Yer better look at it good, ’fore yer make up yer mind to try it.”

David Lindsay drew in his head and spoke to his companion.

“Look out and tell me if you still persist in going on,” he said.

“I will look out just to please you, but I am bent on going on!” she replied, as she came forward and gazed up the ravine.

“Well?” inquired young Lindsay.

“Well, it looks threatening—very! But I said that I was bent to go on! Where the mules can go, I can go,” she persisted.

“Drive on!” exclaimed the young man to the driver.

Tubal did not “drive,” however. He slowly descended from his seat and came to the mules’ heads and led them on.

It was well, perhaps, that the heavy wagon-cover concealed the terrors of the road that otherwise must have been discovered even through the darkness of the night, and daunted Gloria’s unconquered spirit.

276After a precipitous descent and the crossing of the stream, the young travelers in the wagon became conscious that the road was rising diagonally up the mountain side.

When they had ascended some considerable distance, David Lindsay put his head out to peer through the shadows and survey the scene.

He found that they were climbing a steep, narrow road on the face of the mountain, with a towering precipice on their right and a falling one on their left, and no room for any vehicle to pass that should chance to meet the wagon.

He drew in his head and was careful to say nothing to his companion of what he had seen. A single start of the mules—a misstep—a balk—would be destruction to man and beast—for over and down the face of the precipice they would go.

Higher and higher they climbed, and climbed for hours and hours.

Then they began to descend—slowly and heavily for perhaps an hour longer.

Finally old Tubal pulled up his mules, stood to recover his breath, and then came to the front opening in the cover of the wagon, and said:

“Well, young marster, here we is at the gate lodge o’ Ghost Hall, or Debbil’s Den, whichebber yer likes for to call it. I’ll let yer out here, young marster, for I tell yer good, no money yer could pay down to me would ’duce me to pass t’rough dem dere gates ob hell!”

“Come, come, Tubal, don’t use such strong language before a young lady,” said David Lindsay, as he descended from the wagon and helped his companion to alight.

“I don’t use no stronger language than what de 277good book uses anyways. Help me to lift de trunk out, young marster.”

“Let us see first whether there is any one up in the gate-house,” said David Lindsay, as he left the side of the wagon.

Then he suddenly stood still gazing.

The sombre scene around them had a weird glamour that spell-bound him to the spot.

“What place is this?” he muttered to himself. “It is like a place seen in a dream. It might be a place in some other planet, in some dead earth, or extinct sun!”

It was an awful scene! Mountains rose on every side, their bases clothed with dark forest.

Nearer and dimly visible under the overclouded night sky, towered hideous black rocks, and dark, spectral pine trees that seemed to take goblin shapes in the obscurity. Far back on the right hand, from the midst of these, and scarcely to be distinguished from them, loomed the roof and chimneys of Gryphynshold.

The utter silence as of death that reigned over all, added to the gloom, approaching horror, of this stupendous scene.

David Lindsay turned from it with a feeling of superstitious awe, to the formidable iron gate in the stone wall that ran along the old park on the right hand of the road.

The gate was not locked, but hung heavily upon its strong, rusty hinges, shut by its own weight.

On the right of this gate some outlines of an old lodge could be dimly seen among clustering cedar trees.

But no light appeared to indicate where door or window might be.

278“De old ’oman has gone to bed hours ago, most like,” pleasantly remarked the wagoner, as David Lindsay passed through the iron gate and the wild thicket of cedar bushes and rapped at the door of the dark house.

“Who is there?” almost immediately inquired a voice from within.

“Nobody to hurt yer, ole mist’ess!” shouted Tubal, who was leaning up against a post of the gate, utterly refusing to enter the haunted grounds. “Nobody to hurt yer, ole mist’ess! Yer knows me—Tubal Cummings, from Wolf’s Gap Ferry. I done fotch a young lady and gempleman here what’s come to wisit yer.”

There was a sound of movement in the dark house, and presently a light gleamed through the joints of the windows, and soon afterward the door was opened by an elderly woman, who stood on the threshold, bearing a flaming tallow candle high above her head, and exclaiming:

“Uncle Tubal! Do you say you have brought visitors here at this place, at this hour of the night? Who are they, and what do they want?”

“Dat’s jes’ what dey mus’ ’splain for deirselves, Mist’ess Brent. Yer don’t catch dis ole chile comin’ in dere to tell yer!” exclaimed the man, beating a retreat to the shelter of his wagon.

“Tell her precisely who we are, David Lindsay. Tell her the exact truth,” said Gloria, coming to his side.

Young Lindsay went up to the housekeeper and Gloria followed closely. They could not see the face of the woman, for the candle she held aloft cast her into deep shadow.

279“Let me introduce myself and this young lady, madam——”

“Who are you, then?” abruptly interrupted the housekeeper.

“This is the young lady of the manor. You will probably recognize her when you look at her, though I hear you have not seen her since she was seven years old. I have the honor to be her husband, and my name is Lindsay,” replied the young man.

“Gra-cious Heav-ens!” cried the woman, lowering the candle, and holding it closely under the stranger’s nose, to the great danger of his silky beard.

“Look at me, Mrs. Brent, and see if you can remember me,” said Gloria, with a smile.

The candle was quickly transferred from the danger of singeing David’s mustache to that of scorching Gloria’s nose, as the old housekeeper peered into the girl’s face.

“Ye-es. N-no. I don’t know. I see something in the eyes like, but——”

The old woman stopped and put the candle so close to the girl’s brow that Gloria started and shrank back.

“Pray do not keep the young lady standing out here in this bitter cold. She is already chilled and weary. Let us come in. We expected to find you at the house yonder. But that being shut up and deserted, we must beg shelter from you even here,” persisted David Lindsay.

“Oh, yes, to be sure. Come in. I did not get your letter, indeed I did not, sir, or I should have been ready for you. But you see Wolf’s Gap—that’s the nearest post-office—is a long way off, 280and we never send there except four times a year, when Mr. Cummings, the overseer, sends in his quarterly reports. I didn’t get your letter to say you were coming. I am very sorry, ma’am, that there is nothing better than this poor house to ask you to, but such as it is, you are welcome,” said Mrs. Brent, as she led the young pair into a large room, in which a great fire of hickory logs smouldered luridly in the deep, broad chimney-place.

She lighted a second candle and placed both on the mantel-shelf, and then took from a large deal box near the chimney corner a handful of dry brushwood and put it under the smouldering logs, kindling them into a ruddy blaze.

Finally she placed two chip-bottomed chairs before the fire and invited her visitors to be seated.

“So sorry I did not get your letter, indeed, sir,” she repeated, as she once more stirred the fire.

“We did not write. There was no time. We made up our minds rather suddenly, one day, to come down here, and we started the same evening,” said Gloria, as she leaned back in her chair and stretched her half-frozen feet and hands to the genial blaze.

“Oh, indeed, then, I feel so relieved! Of course, you could not have expected to find the house prepared for you, and are not disappointed,” exclaimed Mrs. Brent.

“I am sorry to say that we are rather so; for we expected to find you living up at the hall, and some rooms at least kept in readiness for just such a contingency as this,” replied Gloria.

“Living up at the other house! Oh, young lady, you don’t know! But I’ll say nothing about that 281now. I am so grieved not to have things comfortable for you here!”

“Never mind—never mind!” exclaimed Gloria, good-naturedly. “To-morrow is a new day, and everything can be arranged then. As for to-night, we are both so tired with our week’s ride that I think we could rest comfortably in any motionless place. I shall remain here with you, and Mr. Lindsay will get our wagoner to show him the way to the overseer’s house, where he proposes to lodge.”

“But that is such a pity, to separate you two! Though, indeed, I have got only one bedroom—the one above this—there are two beds in it. I and my niece sleep in one. The other is vacant and at your service, ma’am, if you don’t object to sharing our room with us,” said Mrs. Brent, apologetically.

“Not at all! I shall be so glad to lie down anywhere after sitting up for a week,” answered Gloria.

“But you would like some supper, sir?” inquired the housekeeper, turning to David Lindsay.

“No, I thank you. We had supper at Wolf’s Gap, and we only need rest. Gloria, I will go out and speak to the wagoner, and see if he is ready to guide me to the overseer’s house. I will also get him to help me in with your trunk,” he whispered, as he arose and left the room.

Gloria now, for the first time since her arrival, looked at the apartment and its occupant. It was a large, rude place, with a bare, flagstone floor, bare, unplastered stone walls; in front a heavy oaken door, flanked by two large windows, whose very sills were stone; a ceiling with heavy rafters crossing it, and finally, the immense, yawning fireplace, with its iron dogs supporting the great, 282smouldering hickory logs from whence the light blaze of brushwood had already died away.

The furniture was as rude as the room—heavy oaken chairs and tables, a spacious dresser with broad shelves reaching from the floor to ceiling, and furnished with all the crockery ware, cutlery, tin, pewter, and iron utensils of the little ménage.

In another corner a tall, coffin-like old clock stood, with its foot on the flagstone floor, and its head to the rafters. A rug of home-made rag carpet lay before the fire, and mats of a similar material lay before the front and back doors.

That was all. It was a rude, plain room.

From the contemplation of the place Gloria turned to the inhabitant.

The latter was a tall, thin, dark-skinned woman with small, deep-set black eyes that had a watchful, sidelong, frightened glance, like those of a person who had suffered one overwhelming terror and was continually looking out for another. Her hair was quite white and parted smoothly over her forehead, and confined by a close white linen cap tied under her chin. She wore a long, narrow, black gown, without a scrap of white about her neck or hands.

“This is a poor, rude place for you to be in, Mrs. Brent. Surely not to be compared with the comfortable apartments that must have been assigned you in the manor house,” said Gloria, compassionately.

“Oh, young lady, don’t mention the manor house. Don’t! You don’t know; you can’t know. But I’ll say nothing more about that now. Here comes the gentleman.” David Lindsay had pushed open the door, and was coming in, holding one handle of the trunk while Tubal Cummings held the other.

283They sat it down on the floor, and Tubal immediately bolted, flinging behind him these words:

“I’ll wait for yer outside the gate, young marster. I can’t stay here, indeed!”

David Lindsay laughed, saying:

“I had the utmost difficulty in persuading that old man to help me with the trunk. I had at length to bribe him heavily before he would venture to do it. And what do you suppose he means to do, after leaving me at the overseer’s?”

“What?” inquired Gloria.

“Go all the way back to Wolf’s Gap to-night.”

“I know he declared that he would do so; but I did not think he would keep his word,” replied Gloria.

“Now, dear, in mercy to the old fellow who has such a long way to return, I must bid you good-night. You, also, need rest so much that you had better go to bed as soon as possible.” So saying, David Lindsay took her hand, pressed it and left the lodge.

The old housekeeper stared.

“Is that the way your husband takes leave of you? I never did! I really never did!” she said.

“We understand each other,” said Gloria, smiling.

“Well, if you do, I suppose that is enough,” muttered Mrs. Brent, who all this time was busy beating up eggs with sugar in a bowl, while something spicy simmered in a saucepan before the fire.

Now she took the saucepan and slowly poured its contents over the beaten eggs in the bowl, stirring thoroughly with a spoon as she poured.

Then she filled a tumbler with the pungent and fragrant compound, and gave it to Gloria, saying kindly:

284“Take this, honey. It is as nice a glass of spiced mulled cider as ever I brewed in my life. It will warm you all through, and drive out any cold you may have caught.”

Gloria smiled, and thanked her kind hostess, and took and sipped the spicy beverage which she found delicious in taste and delightful in effect.

The housekeeper filled a second glass for herself, and sat down and sipped it for company.

“I should have offered to make some for your gentleman, honey, only as he was going out in the cold again it would have done him more harm than good. Besides, to tell the honest truth, I don’t think such indulgence in drink is good for young men anyhow. They begin with cider, and are too apt to end with rum.”

Very much revived and comforted, Gloria finished her mulled cider and put her glass upon the mantelpiece.

“Now, then, dear, we will go up stairs to bed,” said Mrs. Brent, placing her own glass beside the other one, and blowing out one candle and taking the other.

“Are you not going to lock the door?” inquired the visitor.

“Law, child, why? There is no one to molest us—except those that no locks can keep out. However, I’ll do it to please you,” said Mrs. Brent, going to the door and turning the key.

“Thank you very much,” said the young lady.

“You’re welcome, honey. Now, then, come to bed,” she added, as she led the way through the back door to a narrow passage from which a staircase ascended to the upper room.

285Gloria picked up her carpet-bag and followed her conductress.

The room above was of the same size with the one below—like that, the walls were of hewn stone, unplastered, but the floor was of heavy oak planks. There were three large windows in front, all hung with coarse blue and white plaid cotton curtains. There was a fireplace, a size smaller than the one below; a pine table, with a small standing looking-glass on it, under the middle window, opposite the fire. There were two beds in the corners of the room, with their low head-boards immediately under the two end windows, on each side of the rude dressing-table.

One of these beds was smoothly made up, as if waiting its occupant. The other was tumbled and tenanted.

“Come here,” said Mrs. Brent in a whisper, going towards the latter.

Gloria followed her and beheld the sleeper, who, in some restlessness, had thrown off the cover, revealing her head, breast and arms.

She was a very young girl, with a delicate face and fragile form, fair, transparent complexion, blooming rosy-red on cheeks and lips, very light, golden-red hair clustering in glittering tendrils around the white forehead and roseate cheeks, and with petite features. She would have been a perfect little beauty but for some irregularities that were even more piquante and charming than any classic perfection could possibly be. First, her dark brown eyebrows were of the fly-away pattern, depressed towards the bridge of the nose and raised towards the temples. Her tiny nose, no bigger than a baby’s, was the most dainty, yet the most decided 286pug that ever was seen. Her upper lip was short, and her chin pointed. The whole character and expression of the fair, dainty, petite face, was sly, roguish, mischievous, not to say impish and malign. One arm, the under one, as she lay upon her right side, was drawn back with crooked elbow and clenched little fist. The other arm, the upper one, was thrown over the pillow, also with crooked elbow and clenched little fist. The attitude of the little sleeping beauty was a belligerent one.

“Now that’s my niece Philly—Philippa, you know, ma’am—and that’s the way she always sleeps. Just like a kitten or a puppy that is dreaming of a fight. Now just you watch!”

With these words, Mrs. Brent took hold of the shoulder of the sleeper, exclaiming:

“Phil! Phil! Wake up! Move farther! You’ll tumble out of the bed!”

The sleeper gave a little growl and a great bounce, and threw herself over on her other side, striking another aggressive attitude, and immediately relapsed into deep sleep. Gloria could not help laughing as she said:

“She is very pretty and very good-humored, I am sure, notwithstanding that she dreams of fights!”

“Oh, yes, she is a good girl enough, but an awful trial for all that!”

“Your niece, you said?”

“Yes, my niece,” repeated the housekeeper, as she covered the sleeping girl and set the candle on the mantelpiece.

Then, while the two undressed and prepared for bed, Mrs. Brent volunteered some further information.

“You see there’s a good many Cummingses round 287about here, of a good old Scotch family, too. Did you never read of the Red Comyns and the Black Comyns in your school books, honey?”

“Oh, yes!”

“Well these Cummingses are of the same old clan. I was a Cummings myself before I was married. I am a lone widow now, you know.”

“Yes, I have heard so.”

“Well, I had three brothers. Alexander, who is the landlord and ferryman and post-master down at Wolf’s Gap; and Ralph, who is your overseer here; and last of all, poor Cuthbert, my youngest brother, who was the father of this girl, Philly. He used to drive the stage between Wolf’s Gap and Hill Top in North Caroliny, but he and his wife have been in heaven this many a day. Philly used first to live with Aleck at Wolf’s Gap. I, having no children of my own and being lonesome like, have adopted the orphan. And a great charge she is to me! Why, ma’am, I had rather undertake ten boys than one such girl. She rides the wildest horses; she hunts the worst game. Yes! She rides, shoots and hunts like a wild Indian! And even dreams of it when she sleeps.”

“I shall like Philly! I am sure I shall like Philly! There is something in her,” exclaimed Gloria, as she got into her own bed and drew the cover closely up around her neck, for it was keenly cold up in these mountain regions, so that the great wood fire scarcely sufficed to warm the room.

The housekeeper blew out the candle and laid herself down to rest.

Gloria, utterly prostrated with her week’s ride, no sooner laid her head upon the pillow than she 288dropped into a deep and dreamless sleep that lasted until far into the next morning.

When she awoke, at length, the sun was shining in through the blue and white checked curtains.

She looked around in some confusion on the rude, unplastered walls and ceiling, the bare oak floor, and the unpainted wooden chairs and table, quite unable to remember where she was; but in a few moments memory returned, and she understood the situation.

There was no one but herself in the room, which was now restored to perfect order, the other bed being made up, the fire replenished, the hearth swept, and fresh water and clean towels placed on the rude dressing-table.

“They have all got up and left me to sleep my fatigue off, I suppose,” she said, as she left the bed and began to make her plain morning toilet.

She was soon dressed in a dark blue cashmere gown, with white linen cuffs and collar, and a black bow.

Then she went down stairs and found Mrs. Brent in the lower room, and seated before the fire engaged in carding wool.

“Good-morning, honey! You have had a real good sleep, and I hope it has done you good!” she said, rising, and placing a chair to the fire for her young guest.

“Indeed I have, Mrs. Brent; thank you. It must be very late.”

“Look at the clock, my dear. It is after ten. Well, I am glad you slept so long. I would not have disturbed you if you had slept all day. Now you are down I will get you a bit of breakfast in a few moments,” said Mrs. Brent, as she took up a 289tea-kettle which was sitting on the hearth before the fire, and hung it over the blaze, where it immediately began to sing for boiling.

“Has any one—I mean has Mr. Lindsay been here this morning?” inquired Gloria.

“Oh, yes, honey. Mr. Lindsay and my brother, the overseer, you know, were here by seven o’clock this morning; but Mr. Lindsay wouldn’t let you be disturbed on no account. He asked me to keep everything very quiet, so as to let you sleep as long as possible, which I am sure I have done, my dear,” replied the housekeeper while she was taking the tea-pot and the cannister from the dresser to make the tea.

“Where are they now?” inquired Gloria.

“Oh, they went right off up to the old house to open and air it. Yes, more than three hours ago,” answered the dame, as she made the tea and set it to draw.

“When will they be back?”

“Well, when they have done the job, I guess; but I don’t know when that will be,” replied the dame, as she took two dressed partridges from a plate on the shelf, and laid them over the fire.

“You see,” she added, as she took a cedar board about the size of a shingle, and plastered one side of it over with a thick corn-meal batter, and put it before the fire, propped up by a smoothing-iron. “You see, they will have to open all the doors and windows from cellar to garret, and kindle fires in every fireplace—that will take them pretty much all day.”

“Well, I think, if you will kindly direct me, I will walk up to the house as soon as I have taken breakfast.”

290“I would advise you not to go yet awhile, honey,” said the housekeeper.

And now she became so busy—laying the cloth, then turning the johnny cake, putting the crockeryware on the table, then turning the partridges—flying quickly from hearth to cupboard, and from cupboard to fireplace—that Gloria could keep up no sustained conversation.

“Now, then, sit up and take your breakfast, my dear,” said Mrs. Brent, when she had at last got the frugal morning meal upon the table.

“These partridges are delicious,” said Gloria, when, with an appetite whetted by the keen mountain air, she had eaten a half of one.

“Yes, that’s some of Philly’s game! She shot them on Saturday. The imp is good for something. Only you see, honey, when she goes out I am always in a dread that she’ll never get back alive. Maybe never be heard of again until her bones are found bleaching on some rocky ledge!”

“Oh, how dreadful! You ought not to entertain such dismal thoughts!”

“I can’t help it, honey, when that girl goes on as she does!”

“Would you have such fears for a boy?”

“Lord, no! My nephews, Ralph’s boys, go hunting almost every day and keep the hotel down there at Wolf’s Gap supplied with game; but they are boys.”

“Well, and she’s a girl.”

“But they know how to take care of themselves.”

“And so does she, I have no doubt, a great deal better than they do. I like Philly. I am sure I shall like her very much. Where is she now?”

“Oh, gone out with her gun and dogs. What do I 291tell you? When she isn’t about some mischief she is dreaming of it.”

“I am her debtor for a delicious breakfast. I will not hear her blamed. I like Phil better the more I think of her. I admire her all the more for having such a dauntless spirit in such a little, fragile body.”

Gloria had scarcely spoken these words when there was a sudden and tumultuous entrance of a girl in a cap, jacket, short skirt, and long boots, with a game-bag slung over her shoulders, a fowling-piece in her hands, and a couple of dogs at her heels.

She set her gun down with a ringing clank in the corner, then pulled her game-bag off and threw it on the floor at the feet of the old lady, exclaiming:

“There auntie! There’s a treat for your dinner! Eight brace of birds, and all bagged in less than two hours! Say! have you got any fresh meat for Æneas and Dido? Good dogs! Good dogs!” she continued, patting the heads of a fine pointer and a finer retriever.

“My dear, don’t you see a lady present?” said the housekeeper, in an admonishing tone.

The girl seemed to see the lady for the first time. She fell back a step or two, dropped her chin upon her chest, turned up her eyes shyly, and put her finger in her mouth like a stupid and awkward child in the presence of a stranger.

“Mrs. Lindsay, this young person is my naughty niece, Philippa.”

“I am glad to see you, Miss Cummings,” said Gloria, who could not help thinking all that awkward shyness was just put on for the fun of the thing.

292“My name is Phil. I don’t know myself by any other name,” replied the girl, giving her hat a push that cocked it on one side of her curling, salmon-colored hair, and gave an additional air of impishness to the mischievous face beneath.

“Then I am even gladder to see you, Phil! Gladder than I should be to see Miss Cummings. I hope we will be friends. Shall we, Phil?”

“I don’t know—maybe—I think so—if you don’t begin to put on airs with us,” slowly and condescendingly replied the elf.

“I hope I shall do nothing so silly. Why should you suspect me?”

“Oh, I know you are our young lady of the manor, and have come with your fine husband, who is a very great man indeed, to take possession of everything! If the ghosts up there will let you. Ah!” said the imp, with a malign leer in her beautiful, long, light blue eyes.

“I am truly sorry, but I am really not to blame for being your lady of the manor. It was a providential arrangement in which I was no more consulted than I was about being born. I hope you will forgive me for finding myself in such an obnoxious position, and be my friend,” said Gloria, with a good-humored sarcasm that seemed to win the impish creature before her.

“I don’t know what I can do for you. I don’t know how to be anybody’s friend unless I can do something for them. I can do nothing for you but keep you in birds and hares and such. That is not much. They are so plenty in the forests below here,” said Phil, thoughtfully.

“That is much more than I shall be able to do for you.”

293“I don’t want anybody to do anything for me, and what’s more, I won’t have it. I want to do all the doing myself.”

“Oh, you proud little sinner! Well, there is something I want you to do for me right away. You know the path up to the house. Will you show it to me?”

“Yes, I will go there with you, but not right away! I must feed Æneas and Dido first, auntie! I know Uncle Ralph slaughtered an ox last week and sent a lot of beef. I want a couple of pounds of sirloin for my dogs, and I am going to get it,” said the elfish being, throwing off her cap and hurrying out of the back door.

“Now that’s the way, honey, she always does! She’s going to feed them dogs with the best meat in the house!” complained the old lady.

“Well, the dogs have helped her to provide the finest game,” said Gloria.

“Ah, I see, my dear, you are going to encourage that girl! I see it quite plain! Well, I wish you would take her altogether as a seamstress, or housekeeper, if it were possible she could be either, or in any way she could be useful or entertaining to you; for, indeed, I am anxious to get her away from this sort of a wild life that keeps me always in a fever!”

“Perhaps I may take you at your word, Mrs. Brent, if Phil is agreeable; but what would you do without her?”

“Oh, first-rate! I would take Marthy, Aleck’s youngest daughter! She’s older than Phil, and is a first-rate spinner and weaver and seamstress, and house-girl generally. I could do a deal better with Marthy than with this Witch-a-windy!”

294As the old lady spoke, Phil came in and said:

“Well, I’ve given the beauties one full meal, if they never get another! And now I am ready to go with you to Gryphynshold, Mrs.—Mrs.—— Oh, look here now—bosh! You don’t look a bit more of a woman than I am myself, and if I am to be expected to call you Mrs. What’s-her-name, or Anything, our compact of friendship is going to fall through.”

“You may call me anything you wish?” said Gloria.

“Well, what is your other name?” demanded Phil.

“Maria da Gloria de la Vera,” repeated the young lady, with a merry twinkle of her eyes.

“Mar—ree—ar—dar—— Say it over again, please,” exclaimed Phil, stretching her blue eyes.

“Maria da Gloria de la Vera,” repeated the young lady, repressing an inclination to laugh.

“Der—lar—Vay—rah! Heaven and earth and the other place! I forget one end before I understand the other! That will never do! Say, what do they call you at home, when they are in a hurry, you know, and haven’t got time to sit down and repeat it all over slowly at their leisure?”

“They call me Gloria.”

“Glo—ree—ah! Well, that is three long syllables—a great deal too long for a short and busy lifetime! I would rather call you Glo’.”

“Quite right, my dear Phil. You may call me Glo’.”

“It suits you, too, for there’s a glow all around you! Well, then, Glo’, I am ready to escort you to Gryphynshold, Ghost Hall, Devil’s Den, for by all these names is your manor house known, lady,” 295said the strange girl, as she put on her hat and stood waiting.

“I will be with you in a moment,” exclaimed Gloria, as she started up and left the room. She ran up stairs to put on her fur sack and cap, and then hurried down to join her escort.

CHAPTER XXII
WITHIN THE SHADOW
Over all there hung a cloud of fear,
A sense of mystery the spirit daunted,
That said, as plain as whispered in the ear,
“The space is haunted.”
Thomas Hood.
The two young girls walked out of the lodge and found themselves in a thicket of stunted cedar trees, that, because they were higher than her head, prevented Gloria from beholding one of the most magnificent and stupendous landscapes in the country.

A few steps farther, however, brought them out upon the private road that led up to the house.

It was a road so utterly neglected that the thicket of cedars on each side nearly met in the middle, and would have prevented any other than a foot-passenger from passing along it.

This old road led upward all the way to a thickly-wooded knoll, on the summit of which, quite buried in pine and cedar trees, stood the old gray stone building with its heavy oaken doors and heavy oaken-shuttered windows. These were all wide open to the sun and air now.

296“Were you here when your grandmother—I mean your auntie, left the house?” inquired Gloria, as they approached the stone portico leading to the door.

“No—oh, dear, no! I never lived here! I always wanted to, though!” replied the girl.

“Come and stay with me, then, for a while, for I should like very much to have you.”

“And oh, how I should like to come!”

“And you would not be afraid of the ghosts?”

“No! I don’t believe in them! I wish I could! I would rather see a ghost—if such a being exists—than anything else in the world! That is the reason why I want to live in this house—to watch and wait all day in lonesome rooms, and lay awake all night in hope of seeing a ghost. And if there is any particularly evil haunted room in the house—that is the one I wish to sleep in.”

“You shall be accommodated,” said Gloria, with a smile, as she went up the moss-grown steps to the wide-open door—a corresponding door at the back of the hall stood, also, wide open, giving a vista through the spacious hall that was paved with flag-stones of gray rock, and furnished with rude benches of oak and mats of cedar shavings. A broad staircase ascended from the middle of the floor. And near each side of the foot of this staircase, were broad, open chimneys in which great fires of brushwood blazed, at once clearing the atmosphere and heating the place. Yet neither the brilliant sunshine, pouring in through the open doors, nor the genial fire flaming up the chimneys, could dispel a certain air of gloom that pervaded the house, depressing all who were within it.

Four inner doors—two on each side—were also 297open, giving views of large, lofty rooms, all with flagstone floors and bare stone walls, and rude, plain oak chairs and tables. No carpets, no curtains, no pictures varied the coarse monotony of their aspect.

David Lindsay came out from one of the rooms, and seeing Gloria, exclaimed:

“You here! I had hoped to have had things in some better order before letting you see the old house. But, how are you? I hope you slept well and are refreshed.”

“Thanks. Yes, to all your questions. And now I wish to go all over the house,” said the young lady.

“In its present condition it is fit for nothing but a barn or store-house! The more I see of it the more easily I can conceive of the savage nature of the men who built and lived in it; and the more I wonder at its purchase by such a man as the late Count de la Vera! But the mountains are supposed to be rich in mineral wealth for any who have money, and enterprise enough to work them.”

While the two spoke together, Mrs. Brent and one of her nephews came in by the front door.

“Well, honey, you see as soon as I righted up the house, I felt as if I ought to come here and see if I could be useful; but I felt most afraid to come up that lonesome road by myself, and maybe I mightn’t ’a’ got here, after all, if young Jim hadn’t come along with a quarter of mutton for the larder, and I just made him stop and bear me company,” she said, as she went to one of the fires and began to warm her hands.

“Are the rooms up stairs as bad or worse than 298these?” inquired Gloria, after she had inspected all on the lower floor.

“Oh, they are better. Come up and see them, honey. The bedrooms are all good, and the beds are well preserved. You see, honey, the place has not been so badly neglected as you might think. I have done something to earn my salary. I have come up here in the day once every week with some of the niggers, and had the place opened and aired and fires made in the bedrooms to dry the dampness,” said Mrs. Brent, as she led the way up the broad staircase.

“Well, except that these chambers are drier and cleaner, they have not much to boast of beyond the rooms below. The whole house is awful gloomy. One does not need to see a ghost here. One feels that it is haunted,” said Gloria, shuddering, as she completed her inspection of the upper rooms.

“Yes, honey, even in the daytime, with the blessed sun shining in at all the open windows, and people going up and down. Then just think what it must have been at night with no one but my lone self up here and an old colored man and woman in the kitchen down stairs—after what I had seen and heard, too,” muttered the old lady, turning pale.

“You? Is it possible, Mrs. Brent, that there can be any foundation for these absurd stories circulated amongst the superstitious colored people, and that you yourself have had any cause to credit them?” inquired Gloria, in great surprise.

“Now see here, honey, I put it to yourself. What did you say yourself, just now? ‘One feels that it is haunted.’”

“Oh, yes, by the memory of all the stories of mad 299orgies and atrocious deeds that we have heard of the furious old Gryphyns who used to live here, and—the curse that fell upon them. The air is full of maledictions! Haunted by these, Mrs. Brent. Spirits terrible enough to daunt the bravest, yet not visible ghosts,” said the young lady.

“That which I saw and heard, I saw and heard,” solemnly answered the housekeeper, sinking down in an old, green chintz covered arm-chair on one side of the fire that had been kindled in one of the bedrooms.

“What was it, Mrs. Brent?” inquired Gloria, her curiosity getting the better of her discretion, as she drew a chair to the side of the old lady and seated herself.

“It was that which drove me out of this large, once comfortable and convenient house, to take refuge in that rough, deserted porter’s lodge, at the gate, and has prevented me from ever coming back here except in broad daylight, and with plenty of people to keep me company.”

“But what was it, then, Mrs. Brent?”

“Nor was that the only time I saw and heard what was not of this world! No, nor of heaven either! Nor am I the only one who has seen and heard things about this place enough to raise the hair and curdle the blood of the boldest man in the country.”

“Oh, but you have not told me yet what has been seen and heard about this haunted spot to strike such terror into the hearts of men,” said Gloria, beginning to be infected by the superstitious fears of her companion.

“An evil spirit from the pit! and those he brings with him!” muttered the housekeeper in a low voice.

300“What do you mean?” inquired Gloria, in hushed tones.

“The last master of Gryphynshold—old Dyvyd Gryphyn! He whose life was the wickedest of all the wicked ones that had gone before him! He who turned his young wife, or sweetheart—no one knows which she was—out of doors in the middle of a bitter cold January night to perish of cold, as she did on the mountain side! He who that next day was killed in a wicked duel, and whose body lies buried in the unconsecrated earth of the family burial ground—for they were all infidels, and wouldn’t let a minister of the Gospel come on the premises. He it is whose spirit cannot rest in the grave, or tarry even with his fellow-devils in the pit, but walks continually up and down through house and thicket in the darkness of the darkest hours in the night!”

“And you have seen him?” questioned Gloria, with incredulous astonishment.

“I was the first to see and hear him after his being killed in the duel. It was no dream, ma’am, it was no delusion, though you look as if you thought so! It was late at night—the night after that poor young creature had been torn from her bed and turned out to die of cold on the mountain. It was a still, cold, freezing night—one of those silent, bitter winter nights when the frost seems to steal into the very marrow of your bones. I was sitting by the big fire in the front hall, waiting for the master to come home so that I could let him in. I had sent all the servants to bed, because they were tired with their work, poor things! and, besides, they would have to get up so early in the morning that they could not afford to lose their 301rest. Well, I was sitting there before the fire, with my knees roasting and my back freezing, and not a sound to be heard all over the house, not even a cricket or a mouse. I don’t know which was the most awful, the stillness or the cold. Suddenly——”

“Well, suddenly what?” eagerly demanded Gloria, seeing that the old lady paused longer than necessary.

“Suddenly there came on the stillness a violent rush, as of a great gust of wind, that forced the front door open. I jumped up in a panic, but dropped down again; for there stood the master, pale as a corpse, with a ghastly wound on his temple, from which the blood was slowly trickling down his cheek. He did not stop a moment, but glaring at me, strode down the hall, and up the staircase, and disappeared at the top.”

“Good Heavens!”

“I was a strong woman at that time, but I came near swooning, for I thought it was the master himself in the flesh, and that he had got his death-wound somehow. But soon rallying myself, I got up and shut the front door, and bolted and barred it. The night was now as still and breathless as it had been before Dyvyd Gryphyn rushed in with that furious wind. After I had fastened the door I went up to the room over the kitchen in the back building, and waked up old Tubal, who was then the only man-servant about the house.

“‘Tubal,’ I said, ‘rise and dress quickly. Your master has just come home, dangerously wounded.’ Perhaps I ought then to have gone directly to the assistance of the supposed wounded man, but, somehow, I felt afraid to go alone. Old Tubal, who had 302been too much accustomed to scenes of violence and their results, in that house, to be very much shocked at what I told him, merely grunted forth:

“‘It’s nothing more’n I expected,’ and then hastened to dress himself and follow me to his master’s room. Well, when we got there——”

“Yes! when you got there!” eagerly exclaimed Gloria, who would hardly let the old lady pause for breath.

“There was no master to be seen! No sign of a master. We looked through some of the nearer rooms, but without finding him. Then we sat down in his room and waited, thinking that he might have gone somewhere about the house, and would be back soon. We waited and waited, until at length I became alarmed; for I thought he might have fainted from loss of blood in some other part of the house. Then old Tubal and myself recommenced our search and went into every room, closet and passage of the house from the attic to the cellar, but without finding any trace of Dyvyd Gryphyn.”

“And was he never found?” inquired Gloria, in a tone of awe.

“Yes, honey, his body had been found twenty miles away, hours before his spirit appeared to me in the hall. At sunrise the next morning, the men who had found it on the duelling ground the other side of Wolf’s Gap, arrived with it at the hall here. There was an inquest, of course, and then the truth came out.”

“What was the truth?”

“Why, it seems that on the occasion of the last feast that Dyvyd Gryphyn held here when he was drunker than usual, he sent for his young wife, and 303made her come down and sing for his wild companions. She had a beautiful voice. They were all mad that night. They shocked and terrified the poor thing so that near morning she escaped and fled from them, and locked herself up in her room in a state bordering upon distraction.”

“Yes, yes, I have heard that story before.”

“Well, when the man came to his senses the next day, he rode away with his guests as far as Wolf’s Gap, where they all stopped to rest and drink. They spoke rudely of Gryphyn’s hidden beauty, and one man—a Colonel Murdockson—boasted of signs and signals that the lady had given him the night before, to the effect that she was ready to run away with him.”

“Revolting!”

“It was as false as the father of lies! Yet Dyvyd Gryphyn, with the furious jealousy of his race, believed the slander. He challenged Murdockson on the spot, and the meeting was arranged to take place the next afternoon in the hollow below Wolf’s Gap.”

Gloria shuddered.

“The meeting was to be without seconds, and it was only to end in the death of one or both. When all was settled, Dyvyd Gryphyn set out to return home, arrived only at midnight, strode to his wife’s chamber, dragged her out of bed and thrust her out in the midnight storm to perish on the mountains, as she did, for her body was also found—though, as the birds of prey had been the first to discover it, it was hardly recognizable.”

“I have heard that, too!” shuddered Gloria.

“I only refer to that in its connection with the duel. The next morning he left home to fight it, 304although we, at Gryphynshold, had no suspicion of what was afoot. And that night I waited for him as usual when—his spectre came. After the inquest, and the verdict in accordance with the facts, the body of Dyvyd Gryphyn was buried out yonder, as I told you. But his spectre still haunts the place.”

“What became of Murdockson?”

“He left the neighborhood after the duel, and has never been heard of since. You see, ma’am, there were circumstances of horrible atrocity connected with that affair, which I have not

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Edith Lyle
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Edith Lyle
A novel

Author: Mary Jane Holmes

Release date: May 19, 2023 [eBook #70808]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: G. W. Carleton and Company, 1876

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDITH LYLE ***
POPULAR NOVELS.

BY

Mrs. Mary J. Holmes.

1.—
TEMPEST AND SUNSHINE.
2.—
ENGLISH ORPHANS.
3.—
HOMESTEAD ON THE HILLSIDE.
4.—
‘LENA RIVERS.
5.—
MEADOW BROOK.
6.—
DORA DEANE.
7.—
COUSIN MAUDE.
8.—
MARIAN GRAY.
9.—
DARKNESS AND DAYLIGHT.
10.—
HUGH WORTHINGTON.
11.—
CAMERON PRIDE.
12.—
ROSE MATHER.
13.—
ETHELYN’S MISTAKE.
14.—
MILLBANK.
15.—
EDNA BROWNING.
16.—
WEST LAWN.
17.—
EDITH LYLE. (New.)
“Mrs. Holmes is a peculiarly pleasant and fascinating writer. Her books are always entertaining, and she has the rare faculty of enlisting the sympathy and affections of her readers, and of holding their attention to her pages with deep and absorbing interest.”
All published uniform with this volume. Price $1.50 each and sent free by mail, on receipt of price, by
G. W. CARLETON & CO., Publishers,
New York.
Edith Lyle
A Novel.
BY
Mrs. MARY J. HOLMES,
AUTHOR OF
TEMPEST AND SUNSHINE—LENA RIVERS—MEADOW BROOK—MARIAN GREY—CAMERON PRIDE—ETHELYN’S MISTAKE—EDNA BROWNING—WEST LAWN, ETC., ETC.
logo
NEW YORK:
G. W. Carleton & Co., Publishers.
LONDON: S. LOW & CO.
MDCCCLXXVI.
Copyright, 1876, by
DANIEL HOLMES.
John F. Trow & Son,
Printers and Stereotypers,
205–213 East 12th Street,
NEW YORK.
TO
MY ESTEEMED FRIENDS,
Francis S. Street and Francis S. Smith,
Editors of the New York Weekly,
TO WHOM
I AM INDEBTED FOR SO MANY KINDNESSES IN THE PAST,
I DEDICATE
THIS STORY.
vii
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER	 	PAGE
Introductory. By Esther Olivia Armstrong	9
I.,	and Call it Abelard	10
II.—	Heloise	14
III.—	The Day of the Funeral	21
IV.—	The Confession	28
V.—	Edith Lyle	36
VI.—	The Beginning of a New Life	41
VII.—	Eleven Years Later	44
VIII.—	Mother and Daughter	51
IX.—	Godfrey Schuyler	56
X.—	Colonel Schuyler	68
XI.—	Edith’s Diary	76
XII.—	Edith and her Mother	81
XIII.—	Mrs. Barrett’s Lodgers	84
XIV.—	Colonel Schuyler Returns	87
XV.—	Edith’s Answer	92
XVI.—	Breaking the News	101
XVII.—	The Bridal	108
XVIII.—	At Oakwood after the Bridal	114
XIX.—	The Bridal Days	119
XX.—	On the Sea	132
XXI.—	The Ladies at Schuyler Hill	145
XXII.—	The News at Schuyler Hill	149
XXIII.—	Mrs. Rogers and Gertie at Hampstead	159
XXIV.—	Mrs. Rogers Gets Work	172
XXV.—	They Come	175
XXVI.—	How they Received her	178
XXVII.—	After Dinner	189
XXVIII.—	One Day in Hampstead	198
XXIX.—	The First Sunday in Hampstead	209
XXX.—	Company at Schuyler Hill	217
XXXI.—	The Church Sociable	222
XXXII.—	Mrs. Rogers Speaks her Mind	230
XXXIII.—	The New Life at the Hill	234
viiiXXXIV.—	Mary Rogers	240
XXXV.—	Gertie at the Hill	246
XXXVI.—	After Four Years	256
XXXVII.—	The Travellers	261
XXXVIII.—	Colonel Schuyler Interviews Godfrey	275
XXXIX.—	Colonel Schuyler Interviews Gertie	282
XL.—	Robert Macpherson Interviews Gertie	288
XLI.—	A few Details of that Summer in Hampstead	293
XLII.—	The Sail on the River	297
XLIII.—	The Course of Love does not Run Smooth	304
XLIV.—	Godfrey and Gertie	307
XLV.—	Robert Macpherson and Colonel Schuyler	313
XLVI.—	Godfrey and his Father	315
XLVII.—	Waiting	318
XLVIII.—	Giving in Marriage	320
XLIX.—	Mrs. Doctor Barrett	323
L.—	The Storm Gathering	330
LI.—	The Storm Bursts	333
LII.—	The Battle between Life and Death	343
LIII.—	Colonel Schuyler and the Secret	348
LIV.—	Husband and Wife	356
LV.—	The Search in London	364
LVI.—	Gertie	372
LVII.—	In New York	375
LVIII.—	Gertie and the Story	384
LIX.—	The Story in Hampstead	391
LX.—	Edith and Gertie	397
LXI.—	Godfrey and Gertie	402
LXII.—	The Wedding	408
LXIII.—	Mary Rogers’ Letter to Edith	411
LXIV.,	and Last	419
EDITH LYLE.
9
INTRODUCTORY.
BY ESTHER OLIVIA ARMSTRONG.

s I sit here, this bright autumnal morning, and from the window of my room look out upon the river winding its way to the sea, there falls upon my ears the merry chime of bells from the tower of the old gray church,—wedding-bells they are,—and their echoes float across the water, and up the mountain side, and then die away among the wooded cliffs beyond, where the foliage has just been touched with the October frost, and has here and there a gay trimming of scarlet and gold on its summer dress of green. There is a wedding at St. Luke’s to-day, and the bridal party is passing now, and I kiss my hand to the beautiful bride, who flashes a smile at me from those wonderful eyes of hers,—eyes so like in expression to those of the elder lady who sits beside her, and but for whom that wedding at St. Luke’s would never have been. They are gone now from my sight, and only the pealing of the bells is heard in the quiet street, and as I muse upon the strange event which has made the people of our town wild with excitement and curiosity, and of which I, perhaps, know quite as much as any one, I ask myself, “Why not write out the story, suppressing names, and dates, and localities, and give it to the world, as a proof that real life is sometimes stranger than fiction.”

And so, just as the sound of the marriage-bells dies away among the distant hills, I take my pen to begin a tale which 10will have in it no part of my own life, save as it was sometimes interwoven with the lives of those whose history I write. I am only Esther Armstrong, the village schoolmistress, a plain, old-fashioned woman of thirty-five, with no incident whatever in my life worth recording; and so, with no thought that any one will accuse me of egotism or conceit, I write down

CHAPTER I.,
AND CALL IT ABELARD.

he Schuylers were of Holland descent, and had married and intermarried in England and America, and had in their family a title, it was said, and they boasted of their Dutch blood, and English blood, and American blood, and, like the famous Miss McBride, “were proud of their money and proud of their pride,” and proud to be known as “the Schuylers of New York,” who had for so many years kept themselves free from anything approaching to plebeianism, and whose wealth and importance had been steadily on the increase since the first English Schuyler left his ancestral halls in Lincolnshire across the sea. But the race was gradually dying out, and the only male member of the direct line in America was Colonel Howard, a proud, reticent man, who, a few years before my story opens, had married Miss Emily Rossiter, a lady fully up to the Schuyler standard of moral and social worth.

It was true she brought with her a plain face and a brain not overburdened with ideas, but she added to these the sum of two hundred thousand dollars and an exclusiveness which saw nothing outside her own narrow circle of friends. At the time of her marriage her husband, Colonel Howard Schuyler, who loved the fresh grass and the air from the hills better than brick walls and stony pavements, suggested that they should spend a portion of the summer at his country-seat on the river, but to this the lady would not listen. Hampstead was too quiet. Her 11elegant laces, and satins, and diamonds, would be sadly out of place in that rustic neighborhood, she thought; and so she went first to Europe, and then, season after season, to Newport and Saratoga, and had a cottage at Nahant, and climbed the White Mountains and the Catskills, and tired herself out in her pursuit of happiness, until, at last, broken in health and spirits, she signified a wish to go to Hampstead, where she could find the rest she needed.

And so one April day Colonel Schuyler came up to our little town with a whole army of workmen, who began at once their task of tearing down and rebuilding the old house, which had belonged to the Schuylers so long, and which latterly had been unoccupied and gradually going to decay. The house, which was very large, stood upon an eminence overlooking the town of Hampstead and the river below, and from this fact the place was known as Schuyler Hill, though for years and years not a Schuyler had lived there or manifested the slightest interest in it. There was a time, however, within my mother’s memory, when all through the summer months high festival had been held at the old place by the Schuylers, whose graves were now in a little inclosure at the summit of the hill, where the tall evergreens were growing, and where the weather-stained headstones were, with their quaint devices and eulogies of people dead long before I was born. Sometimes on a bright summer afternoon I used to climb over the low railing into this yard, to gather the roses and sweet-brier which grew there in such profusion, and, seated on the grass, I would muse upon the dead folk who slept below, and wish so much for a return of the days of which my mother had told me, when the great house was full of high-born people, who made the neighborhood so gay, and whose revellings were sometimes prolonged far into the night.

At last, however, there was a prospect of those days coming back again, and the whole town was alive with wonder and curiosity when it was known that not only was the old house to give way to a new and elegant modern structure, but that the family was really coming there to live a good portion of the year. Hampstead, which had slept so long, was alive now. 12Property went up, and the people began to talk of a bank, and a new hotel, and sent a petition that the express trains from Albany should stop there, instead of thundering by on the wings of the wind with a snort and a scream, which I thought was tantalizing and impertinent in the extreme. Great, too, was the excitement and interest with regard to the new house, which, under swift and efficient workmen, grew so rapidly that, early in June, the framework of the tower could be seen above the tree-tops, and was watched eagerly by the curious villagers.

“Lady Emily,” as her English maid always called her, came up one day to see the place and give some directions with regard to certain rooms intended expressly for herself, and with her came little Godfrey, her only son, a brown-eyed, sweet-faced boy not quite six years old. I remember just how they looked as they drove through the town in their open barouche, Lady Emily in her jaunty bonnet, which I thought too small and young for her pale, faded face, and little Godfrey in his velvet suit, with his long hair curling on his neck. He was a pleasant, sociable child, and soon made the acquaintance of all the workmen, but was best pleased with Abelard Lyle, the young Englishman who was employed upon the tower, and who at night, when his work was done, made wonderful wagons and carts for the pretty little lad. All day long Godfrey played about the building, and sometimes climbed the highest possible point, and stood watching the men at their work below. Especially was he delighted with the tower where Abelard was; and one morning, the third after his arrival at Hampstead, he mounted to a timber above the young man’s head, where he stood waving his cap and hurrahing to his mother, who was driving leisurely about the grounds in her pony phaeton. She saw him, and with a frantic gesture of her hand motioned him to come down, while Abelard, too, called aloud to him and warned him of his danger. How it happened Godfrey never could explain. He only knew that he stepped backward and fell, that Abelard caught him by the arm and threw him with a desperate effort upon a narrow platform, where he lay unharmed, while his brave deliverer lay on the rubbish far below, a crushed, bleeding 13thing! Only a thing now,—no life, no motion, no soul, for that had gone to God; and they took the limp, insensible object and laid it upon the grass, which was wet with the blood pouring from the deep wound upon the temple where a sharp stone had struck. Trembling with fear, little Godfrey came down the long ladders and across the piles of boards to the mutilated form upon the grass; and young as he was, he never forgot the look of the pale, dead face upturned to the summer sun.

“Oh father!” he cried, as Colonel Schuyler came up, “he catched me and throwd me onto the board, and tried to hold on himself, but couldn’t; and now he’s dead, and I liked him so much; what shall we do?”

They could do nothing but bear the poor youth to his boarding place near by, where they washed the blood and dirt from his stained face and matted hair, and then began to ask where he came from, and who his relatives were, if he had any. He was an English boy, and had not been long in the country, some one said; but nobody could tell anything definite concerning him or his friends, until there stepped from the crowd an elderly, dignified woman, whom the people recognized as Mrs. Fordham, a comparative stranger to them all. She, too, was English, and she knew the youth who had lost his own life in his efforts to save another. She had known him on the ship, she said. He had come to America in the same vessel with herself a few months before. If they liked, they could take him to her house and bury him from there, as she was the only acquaintance he seemed to have, and he had sometimes called upon her since coming to Hampstead. To this proposition the matron of the boarding-house assented eagerly. A dead body and a funeral were not at all to her taste, and besides she was not sure as to the pay she might receive for her trouble, and she thanked Mrs. Fordham so cordially, and evinced so strong a desire to be rid of her late boarder, that the matter was arranged at once, and Mrs. Fordham started for home to make ready for the dead man, who had been there only the night before, and had left her so full of life, and health, and hope for the untried future.

14
CHAPTER II.
HELOISE.

f Mrs. Fordham but little was known in Hampstead at that time. She had only been with us since the first of May, and soon after her coming she had said that if she could not have the best society she would prefer to have none; and as the so-called best society was a little shy of strangers and foreigners, she was left mostly to herself, and was seldom seen except at church, where she was a regular attendant, and where her daughter, a young girl of fifteen or more, attracted much attention by the exceeding beauty of her face, and the delicate refinement of her manner.

Subsequently we learned more of her history, which was as follows:

A native of Berwick, in England, she belonged to what might be called the “higher poor class.” A nursery governess in her girlhood, she had come in constant contact with many high-born ladies who visited in the family of her employer, and whom she watched and imitated until there was in her manner a certain dignity and air of cultivation which marked her as different from others in her own rank of life. Exceedingly ambitious, she refused many an offer which her companions called good, and at the age of thirty was married to Henry Fordham, a poor curate, whose parish was on the Scottish border among the heather hills. Here, after three years of wedded life, she buried him and returned to her lonely home in Berwick, with one only child, a little girl, whom she called Edith Heloise.

As the daughter of a clergyman Edith was a born lady, and Mrs. Fordham felt all her old ambition revive, as she thought what her daughter might one day become,—a titled lady perhaps, and certainly the mistress of some rich man’s home; and to this end she was carefully secluded from the common people around her, and early taught to think that a brilliant future lay before her if she would follow implicitly the instructions of her 15mother. From a distant relative Mrs. Fordham had received a small annuity, on which she managed to live very comfortably until Edith, or Heloise, as she preferred to call her, was fifteen, when she determined upon emigrating to America, where her daughter’s chances for a high social position were greater than in England.

In the same vessel with her was Abelard Lyle, a young carpenter from Alnwick, who was also going to seek his fortune in the western world. Arrived at New York he found employment at once on Col. Schuyler’s house in Hampstead, whither, at his instigation, Mrs. Fordham removed early in May. She was wanting a cottage in the country, she said, and Abelard found one for her and persuaded her to take it, and attended himself to fitting it up, and stood waiting to welcome her when she came at last to take possession. Mrs. Fordham was very gracious and thanked him for his thoughtfulness, and said he was very good and she should not forget his kind interest in her; and yet there was in her manner something which he understood, and which made him doubly anxious to please and propitiate her. He was well enough as a friend and adviser, and during the voyage and after their arrival in New York, Mrs. Fordham had found it convenient to call upon him for help whenever she pleased, but she always managed to make him feel how immeasurable was the gulf between him and her daughter, whose servant he might be, but nothing more.

Heloise was wondrously beautiful, with an ease and grace about her which would have become a princess. From her father’s side she had inherited “good blood,” a fact which her mother kept constantly before her mind. And as she talked of the brilliant matches which had been made in the new world and could be made again, Heloise listened, at first quietly, with a peculiar look in her eyes and a bright flush on her cheek. Latterly, however, there had been a worried, anxious expression on her face when her mother was talking to her, and on the morning of which I write she had left her coffee untouched and stolen from the room so as not to hear what her mother was saying of Abelard Lyle. He had called upon them the previous night, 16and stayed too long and seemed too much at home, Mrs. Fordham thought.

“He is a fine young man, I know, and I respect him very much,” she said; “but he is only a carpenter, and I do not think it well to be very intimate with him. I saw you give him a rose. I wouldn’t do it again, or encourage him to come here.”

Mrs. Fordham was talking to herself now, for Heloise was in the garden, with her face turned toward Schuyler Hill, where the men were already at work. She could hear the sound of their hammers, as stroke after stroke fell upon the heavy timbers, and it seemed to her as if there were a low undertone of music in it all, especially in the strokes which rang out from the tall tower rising above the trees. There was a fascination about that tower; and all during the morning, while her mother, who had an errand in the village, was away, Heloise sat by the window, where she could see the square frame and the broad-shouldered figure upon it.

Once, when she felt sure the face was turned toward her, she waved her handkerchief, and was rewarded with a flourish in the air of the right arm, and then she knew that Abelard could see her; and she sat very still, and applied herself to the ruffle she was hemming, and thought such thoughts as made her cheeks the color of the rose she had given to Abelard the previous night.

And while she sat there thus, there was the sound of carriage-wheels, and Lady Emily Schuyler drove slowly down the road with her English maid in attendance. Heloise had seen the lady in church the day before, but instead of staring at her as the others had done, had shrunk from view, and was glad that she sat behind the Schuyler pew instead of in front of it. And now, as the carriage came near, she leaned back in her chair to avoid being seen.

Thus screened from observation, she sat waiting for it to pass, and her heart gave a great thump when she heard it stop directly before the house, while Mrs. Schuyler uttered an exclamation of delight at the roses growing so profusely in the yard.

“Oh, Janette, how lovely those roses are! I must have 17some for my hair,—they will brighten me up at dinner, and I am looking pale and forlorn, and that vexes Colonel Schuyler so. I wonder if there is any one at home.”

“There must be, for both doors and windows are open. Wait while I see.”

And, suiting the action to the word, the maid, Janette, sprang to the ground, and, opening the gate, walked up to the door of the room where Heloise was sitting.

There was no help for her now. The danger, if danger there was in seeing Mrs. Schuyler, must be met, and Heloise rose at once, and to Janette’s explanation that “Lady Emily would like a few of those lovely roses,” she bowed assent, and went herself to get them.

“It may as well come first as last,” she thought, and, without any covering for her head, she went out into the yard, and, gathering a bunch of the finest flowers, carried them to Mrs. Schuyler, who looked curiously at her, while she expressed her thanks.

Very curiously, too, Heloise looked at her, thinking it would take more than roses to brighten up that sallow, sickly face, and not much wondering that Colonel Schuyler did not like it.

“I don’t believe she remembered me,” she said, as she returned to the house and watched the carriage disappearing from view. “And why should she?” she continued. “She was not at all interested in the matter, and only thought of me as some common girl doing a very foolish thing, I daresay. She looks paler than she did then, and more fretful, too. I wonder if she is happy with all her money?”

And Heloise fell to speculating as to whether she could be happy if she were Mrs. Schuyler and lived in that handsome house on Schuyler Hill. It would be a fine thing, no doubt, to have all the money one wanted, and not to be obliged to turn and fix and mend the Sunday dress until there was but little of the original left; and she tried to fancy herself the mistress of Schuyler Hill, with Colonel Schuyler away and some one else in his place, and her eyes went over the tree-tops to the tall tower and the figure working there.

18“Better as it is,” she thought, and leaning back in her chair she went off into a pleasant kind of reverie, from which she was roused by the sound of horse’s feet, galloping swiftly down the road as if on an errand of life or death.

The rider was one of the men from Schuyler Hill, and swiftly as he rode Heloise detected a look of terror on his face and wondered what had happened.

Involuntarily she glanced again toward the tower, and missed the form she had seen there a short time before. But there was nothing strange in that. She often missed him when he went down for nails or orders from his overseer, and she thought no more of it until an hour later, when her mother came up the walk, looking very red and disturbed, and asking, abruptly:

“Have you heard of the dreadful accident at the Hill?”

Heloise never could explain why it was that she seemed intuitively to know that the accident had reference to the only one through whom she could be deeply touched. But she did know it, and her lips were pale as ashes, and trembled in a grieved kind of way as she said: “It is Abelard.”

“Yes; who told you?” her mother asked.

And Heloise replied:

“No one told me. I knew without telling. Is he much hurt? Where is he?”

And she caught her bonnet from the nail and started for the door.

“Stop, child. Where are you going?” Mrs. Fordham said.

And Heloise replied:

“Going to Abelard. Didn’t you tell me he was hurt?”

“Yes; but,—Heloise”—and Mrs. Fordham hesitated a little, frightened by the expression on her daughter’s face, “you must not go. There is no need; he will be here soon. I told them to bring him, as we are the only friends he has, and I hurried home to get the front room ready. Abelard is dead; he fell from the tower and was killed; there they are now.”

And pointing to the group of men coming slowly down the 19road, Mrs. Fordham hastened to open her best room, and did not see the look of unutterable anguish and horror which came into her daughter’s face when she heard the news.

Heloise did not faint, but she uttered a low, gasping cry, and held fast to the back of a chair, while everything turned dark about her, and she was conscious of nothing except that in the yard there was the tramp of feet as the men came up the walk, bearing the body of him who had left her only the night before, full of life and health. Then she started, and fleeing up the stairs to her own room, threw herself upon the bed, where she lay listening to the sounds below, and trying to realize the full extent of the horror which had come upon her. At last when all was quiet, and the men were gone, she crept to the window and looked out upon the day, which had seemed so bright to her in the early morning, but was so dark and dreary now.

Colonel Schuyler himself was just going through the gate, so occupied with his own thoughts that he nearly stumbled over a little girl who was coming into the yard, and in whom Heloise recognized Phebe Young, the daughter of the woman with whom Abelard had boarded. Heloise was not afraid of Phebe, but she drew back from the window till Colonel Schuyler was out of sight, feeling as if she almost hated him for having built the house where Abelard lost his life.

There was a knock at the door, and ere Heloise could answer it little Phebe Young came in. She had caught a glimpse of Heloise at the window, and thinking it no harm, had come straight up to her room.

“Please, miss,” she said, laying a paper on the young girl’s lap, “we found this under his jacket pinned tight, and ma knew most it comed from your rose bush, for there hain’t no more like it in Hampstead, and she sent it to you, cause she guesses you liked him some.”

It was the rose Heloise had picked for Abelard and fastened in his buttonhole the night before, when they stood for a moment by the gate, and he told her to watch for him on the morrow as he was to work upon the tower. Now he was dead, and the rose, which had been so fresh and dewy then, was wilted and 20crushed, and right in the centre, upon the pure white petals, was a little drop of blood, or rather the stain of one. Abelard’s blood, Heloise knew, and she felt a strange sickness steal over her as she held the faded flower in her hand and gazed upon that bright red spot, the sight of which seemed to stamp a similar mark upon her heart, which ached and throbbed with a new pain.

“Yes, Phebe, thank you; it was kind in your mother; and now, please go; my head is aching badly,” she said; and motioning Phebe from the room, she thrust the blood-stained rose into her bosom and went again to her bed, where she lay until her mother came to see what she was doing.

There were no tears on Heloise’s cheeks, no trace of them in her eyes, but her white face told volumes to Mrs. Fordham, who laid her hand on her daughter’s hair, saying, kindly:

“I never knew you cared so much for him. Poor boy, I am so sorry. He looks very natural. Would you like to see him?”

“No, mother, not now,” was the answer, and that was all that passed between them on the subject of Abelard that day.

Heloise was very sick with headache and kept her room, and at night her mother brought her toast and tea, and tried to make her eat, and told her how kind the Schuylers were, and what a sweet little boy Godfrey was, and how badly he felt at Abelard’s death. He had been to see the body, and his mother had been there, too, and Mrs. Fordham dwelt upon her fine manners and handsome dress, and Godfrey’s velvet suit and manly face, until Heloise felt as if she should go mad, and begged her mother to leave her.

She hated the Schuylers one and all, for through them Abelard had met his death, and she did not dare look into the future or question what it had in store for her. She only felt that all the brightness of her life had been suddenly stricken out, leaving her utterly hopeless and desolate, and long after her mother was asleep in the next room she lay awake wondering what she should do, and if, as she feared, it would be necessary for her to tell. And even if it were not necessary, was it right for her to withhold the secret which was torturing her so 21cruelly? Was it just to Abelard, and did it not look as if she were ashamed of the past as connected with him?

“I am not, darling, I am not!” she moaned; “and to-morrow, when they lower you into the grave, I will be there, and, in a voice everybody can hear, I’ll tell the truth, and face the entire world, mother and all.”

The facing mother was the hardest part of all, and Heloise felt her pulse quicken and her head throb violently as she fancied her mother’s look of surprise and anger when she heard the story which she meant to tell at the grave, and, while thinking how she should combat that anger and reproach, the early summer morning crept into her room, and she heard the watchers with the dead go through the yard into the street, and knew that another day had come.

CHAPTER III.
THE DAY OF THE FUNERAL.

here was a great crowd out to attend the funeral of Abelard Lyle, and, long before the hour appointed for the services, Mrs. Fordham’s cottage was filled to overflowing, as were also the yard and street in front, and it was with some difficulty the Schuyler family could make their way through the dense mass of people.

They came late, and little Godfrey had a knot of crape upon his arm, while Mrs. Schuyler wore a black silk, with no shade of color to relieve her sallow face, and she looked, with her high-bred city air, very much out of place, and very much bored, too, as if she wished it well over, and wondered why her husband should take so much trouble for a poor young man, and an entire stranger. And yet Lady Emily was not without kindly feelings, and she felt very grateful to Abelard Lyle, and very sorry that he should have lost his life in saving that of her son; and, at her husband’s suggestion, she had been to the cottage the day before to see that everything was right, and 22had spoken civilly to Mrs. Fordham, and asked for some more roses, saying:

“I have had some once to-day. I was driving by just before the terrible accident, and saw such a lovely young girl,—your daughter, I suppose?”

“Yes, my daughter,” Mrs. Fordham replied, a new hope rising within her that through the Schuylers Heloise might make her way to distinction.

Heloise had a headache, she said, else she would like so much for Mrs. Schuyler to see her, and she thanked her for speaking so kindly of her, and hoped she would call again when the funeral was over.

To all this Lady Emily pretended to listen and nod assent, and, when she had all the roses she cared for, she said good-morning, and went back to the hotel, where she recounted the particulars of her call to the English maid, with whom she was on very familiar terms.

“Such assurance,” she said, “as that woman has! Why, she talked to me as if I were her equal, and even asked me to call again. She wanted me to see her daughter,—that beautiful young girl whom we saw in our drive this morning. Did I tell you that is where they have taken the young man? I should not be surprised if he were the lover of the girl, only she looked so very young. It seems to me I must have seen her before.”

The appearance of Colonel Schuyler brought to an end the lady’s conversation with Janette, and turning to her husband, she asked where they were intending to bury the young man.

“In our own family lot,” was the reply; and then Lady Emily dropped the flowers she was arranging, and her eyes opened wider than their wont, and fixed themselves upon her husband with a look of incredulity as she said: “Why, Howard, you must be crazy! Surely there are places enough without putting him there.”

“Yes, I know; but, Emily, consider for a moment,—he saved our boy’s life, and I feel like paying him every possible respect, and have ordered his grave to be made just under the 23pine tree at the far side of the lot. There is room enough between for all the Schuylers who will ever be buried there.”

Lady Emily knew from experience that when her husband’s mind was made up, it was useless to argue with him, so she said no more, but thought within herself that when her time came to die, she would request that her aristocratic flesh be laid in Greenwood beside the Rossiters, and not on Schuyler Hill, in that little yard where a few gray, time-worn stones marked the last resting-place of such of the Schuylers as were buried there, and where Abelard Lyle was to be taken. Colonel Schuyler was in one sense as proud as his wife, but with his pride he had much good sense and genuine kindness of heart. But for Abelard Lyle he would have lost his bright-faced boy, and he felt truly grateful to the young man, and resolved to show him every possible respect. So he ordered the funeral himself, and sent to the cottage a handsome rosewood coffin, and was in and out several times to see that all was right, and when the hour for the services arrived, drove down with his wife and son, and enacted the part of chief, and, indeed, only mourner, for Abelard had no relatives, and Mrs. Fordham was too much afraid of being identified with “that class of people” to admit of any great manifestation of feeling on her part. For the sake of the mother country, and because he had been kind to her on the ship, she had allowed the body to be brought to her house, but she managed to impress every one with the great distance there was between herself and the dead man, who looked so calm and peaceful, and handsome in his elegant coffin, with a half-opened rose upon his breast. Mrs. Fordham had put it there at Heloise’s request; but Heloise herself had taken no part in anything, or even seen the body. She had abandoned the idea of going to the grave and startling the people with her story, as she had meant to do the previous day. The pain in her head was too great to admit of her sitting up, and during the entire day she never once appeared below, but lay on the bed in her chamber, with her aching head buried in the pillow, and the faded, blood-stained rose hidden away in her bosom. She heard the people as they assembled in the 24house and yard below, and knew when the Schuylers came by the suppressed hush among the crowd. She heard, too, the clergyman’s voice as he read the burial service, and when they carried the body out she arose from her bed and through the half-closed shutters watched the funeral procession as it moved up the road, to the top of Schuyler Hill, where the open grave was waiting for all that was mortal of Abelard Lyle. Heloise could not pray then, her heart was so hard and rebellious, and ached so with a sense of actual pain, and loss, and a horrid fear of what might be in the future; and once when this fear got the mastery of her she arose, and going to her private drawer, where she kept her hidden treasures, took from it a box, in which she sought for and found, as she supposed, the instrument which was to help her in the hour of need, when she told the world what she must ere long tell. With trembling fingers she unfolded the paper and felt herself grow cold and faint, when she saw that instead of the article which was to prove her innocent and pure, she held only a receipt for goods bought and paid for by her mother in New York. Search as she might, she could not find the document she sought. That was gone, how or where she could not guess until she remembered having burned some waste papers accumulating in her drawer, only a few days before. She had it then and read it over, and supposed she laid it back in the box where she always kept it, but she must have put in its place the receipt which was folded and looked much like it, and burned the only evidence she had that she was not the wicked thing she felt herself to be as she sank upon the floor and wished that she could die. It was terrible to see such grief in one so young, for Heloise, though well grown and tall, was little more than fifteen, and her face when in repose was the face of a child. But it seemed old now, and gray, and pinched with that look of anguish upon it, mingled with something akin to shame, as she crouched upon the floor and whispered to herself:

“What if mother and the world do not believe me?” Then swift as thought the answer came: “I’ll drown myself in the river;” and sitting upright upon the floor, the young girl went 25through in fancy with all the sickening details which such a catastrophe would involve. The anxiety of the mother, the alarm, the search for her body, the finding it at last, and the coroner’s inquest, where possibly her secret would be discovered and she be disgraced all the same.

“No, no,” she moaned, “better live and fight it out, knowing I am innocent, than carry a sullied name to a suicide’s grave.”

“And lose your soul,” something whispered in her ear, making her start with a new horror as she remembered the hereafter she had in her madness almost forgotten.

Falling upon her knees, she sobbed, “Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil.”

That was all she could say, but Jesus knew what she meant,—knew that she wanted help, and He helped her as He always does when asked aright, and her heart ceased to throb so painfully, and the hard look left her face, and the tears came to her relief as she said:

“I know I am innocent, and so does God; and I’ll tell mother the truth, keeping nothing back.”

Heloise had risen now, and with trembling hands was binding up her beautiful hair of golden brown, which Abelard had admired so much, and which she, too, knew was wonderful for its brightness and luxuriance. Would she ever care for it again? she asked herself, as she put it away under a net where not even a single curl could find its way to neck or brow, when suddenly, as if it had been a vision, she saw an elegant room which seemed to be at Schuyler Hill, and in that room a lady of marvellous beauty, with a face like her own, save that it was older and more mature,—a lady, clad in satin and lace, with jewels in her flowing hair and on her snowy neck, and to herself she said:

“That’s I. How came I there?”

Then the mist, if mist it was, which had for a moment clouded her mind, lifted, and she was herself again,—Heloise Fordham, standing in her own humble room and making herself ready for the meeting with her mother, and the confession she meant to make before she slept again.

26I was at the funeral and saw Abelard in his coffin, and thought how dreadful it was to die so far from home and have no tears shed for me, for there were none shed for him. Everybody looked sorry, and sober, and shocked, Colonel Schuyler particularly so, and Lady Emily put her fine cambric handkerchief to her eyes when the rector spoke of the noble deed which never could be forgotten by those for whom it was done; but she did not cry, I know, for I was watching her, and I wanted to shake little Godfrey, who, though he was very subdued and quiet, actually nodded in his high chair before the remarks were over.

It was a sad funeral and a big funeral, but one void of genuine heartache, save as one young heart upstairs was breaking, and of this I did not then know.

Although more than two years the junior of Heloise, I perhaps knew her better than any one else. Intimate friends she had not, but between her and myself an acquaintance had sprung up, born of our common love for flowers and rambles by the river side. We had exchanged slips of roses and geraniums, and talked over the gate of our flower-beds, and once, when caught in a rain-storm, she had taken tea with us and delighted us all with her pretty, ladylike manners and soft, gentle speech. I was charmed with her, and having, as I believed, a secret of hers in my possession, I felt greatly interested in her, and when at the funeral I missed her and heard of the sick headache which was keeping her upstairs, I had my own private opinion with regard to the cause of that headache, and with all the curiosity of a girl of thirteen, determined upon seeing her and judging for myself how a girl looked who had lost her lover. Accordingly I lingered after the funeral, and when the people were gone and I had taken several turns in the garden I ventured up the stairs to her room and knocked softly at her door.

“Come in,” was spoken in a frightened tone, and I went in and found her standing in the middle of the room, her hands pressed to her head and her eyes fixed upon the door with an expression of alarm.

27At sight of me, however, they changed at once, and with a smile she said:

“Oh, it’s you. I thought it was mother.”

“No, she hasn’t had time to come back yet,” I replied; and then, touched by the look of her white face, I burst out: “Oh, Heloise, isn’t it terrible, and he so young and handsome? I am so sorry for you.”

“Hush-sh,” she said, in a tone of alarm. “Why are you sorry for me? Why should any one be more sorry for me than for another?”

She was gazing fixedly at me, and, impelled by something I could not or did not try to resist, I replied:

“Because,—because I guess he was your beau.”

Heloise’s eyes were almost black now in her excitement, and her voice was husky as she said:

“You guess he was my beau! Why do you guess so? What business have you to guess so? Tell me, child.”

She seemed many years my senior then, and in obedience to her question I answered:

“I’ve seen him look at you just as brother Tom looks at Samantha Blackmer, and he’s her beau; and then I saw him kiss you once down by the river, that time I came upon you suddenly, you remember; but I never told. He was your beau, wasn’t he?”

She did not answer for a moment but her lips moved as if she were trying to speak, and at last she said:

“No, he was not my beau, Ettie (that was my pet name twenty years ago, before I was the village schoolmistress)—Ettie, I believe you like me, and I want—I want—you—to,—oh, Ettie, if ever people say bad things of me don’t you believe them, but stand by me, won’t you?”

She had both my hands in hers, and was looking straight into my eyes with an expression which half-frightened me out of my wits, as I told her I would stand by her, without, however, knowing at all what she meant. I was a little proud to be thus appealed to, and when the fixed expression of her face gave way and the tears began to roll down her cheeks, I cried 28too from sympathy and tried to comfort her and made her lie down upon her bed, and when she was more quiet sat by her until I heard her mother’s step below. Then I took my leave, for I was afraid of Mrs. Fordham, whom I met on the stairs, and whose face I fancied looked brighter and more cheerful than faces usually do when returning from a grave.

CHAPTER IV.
THE CONFESSION.

eloise,” Mrs. Fordham exclaimed, as she entered her daughter’s room. “What is the matter? You look as if you had been sick for years. Can it be you loved him so much?”

“Yes, mother; more than you can guess. I’ll tell you about it by and by; to-night, maybe, when I feel stronger. I can’t talk now.”

“Would you like me to tell you how well everything passed off at the grave, and how thoughtful Col. Schuyler was?” Mrs. Fordham continued, and Heloise replied:

“No, mother, not a word, now nor ever. I can’t bear it. I almost hate the Schuylers, and I wish I, too, was dead.”

It was not often that Heloise was thus moved, and her mother looked at her curiously, but she said no more of the Schuylers or Abelard, and busied herself with putting the cottage to rights and preparing a tempting little supper for her daughter. But Heloise could not eat, and after the supper was cleared away and her mother had taken her usual seat upon the back porch, she crept to her side, and putting her head in her lap, said entreatingly:

“Mother, I have something to tell you which will surprise and probably offend you. I ought to have told it before, but I was afraid and kept putting it off. It was wrong, I know, but it cannot now be helped. Abelard and I were married!”

29“You married to Abelard Lyle!” Mrs. Fordham exclaimed, starting back as if a serpent had stung her.

She did not say, “I am glad then that he is dead,” but she thought it, and the thought must have communicated itself to Heloise, for she lifted up her head and looked reproachfully in her mother’s face, while her lip quivered in a grieved kind of way, but she did not cry, and her voice was steady as she said:

“Oh, mother, don’t speak so to me, as if marrying him was the most disgraceful thing I could do. I loved him so much, and he loved me. It was during the long voyage when I saw so much of him. You know you were sick most of the time, and that left me to him, and he was so kind, and before we reached New York I promised to be his wife some time, and meant to tell you.”

“Why didn’t you, then?”

The tone was harsh and unrelenting in which Mrs. Fordham put this question, and Heloise flushed a little and answered, hurriedly:

“It was wrong, I know, but you are, you were,—forgive me, mother,—you are prouder, more ambitious than I am. You think I might marry a nobleman, and I shrank from telling you for fear you would separate us and that time you went to Hoboken and stayed a week with your friend, Abelard persuaded me to be married. We could keep it a secret, he said, until he had something beforehand and was in a better position.”

“Umph! As if he could rise to a better position. Child, with your face and manner you might be the first lady in the land, instead of throwing yourself away on a poor carpenter.”

Mrs. Fordham spoke very bitterly, and her eyes had in them a hard, angry look, which roused all the temper there was in the young girl, who answered, hotly:

“Abelard’s profession was an honorable one. Joseph was a carpenter. Abelard was not to blame for being poor; one of his sisters married into as good a family as there is in Scotland, and had he lived he would have risen above poverty and obscurity. America has many avenues for such as he, and I 30should one day have been so proud of him. Oh, my darling, my husband!”

The temper was all gone now, and the girl’s voice was like a wailing sob as she uttered the name, “My husband,” but it did not touch the mother’s heart or make her one whit sorry for her child.

“Where was it? I mean who married you?” she asked; and Heloise replied:

“A Mr. Calvert, in New York.”

“A dissenter?” was the next question; and Heloise answered:

“Yes, I believe so; Abelard did not care who it was, so we were married, and he looked in the Directory and found the name of the Rev. Charles Calvert, and persuaded me to go there. I think he was not preaching anywhere, but he could marry us the same, and he did.”

“Without any reference or asking you any questions?” Mrs. Fordham said, and Heloise hesitated a little.

She did not like to tell that Abelard had represented her as alone in this country, and had given that as a reason for marrying so young; so she evaded the question, and answered:

“The minister was satisfied, only he said I seemed like a child; and one of the ladies present said so, too, and asked how old I was. Abelard told her, ‘older than I looked,’ and that was all they said.”

Heloise paused a moment, and then went on:

“I have heard since that Mr. Calvert was a half brother of Mrs. Schuyler, who was in the room when we were married, and had little Godfrey with her.”

“Mrs. Schuyler saw you married!” Mrs. Fordham exclaimed. “The matter grows worse and worse. Now that Abelard is dead, I hoped it might not be known. You have seen her since,—do you think she recognized you?”

“I know she did not. She could not have seen me distinctly that night in New York. She was sick, I think; at all events, she lay upon a couch, and did not get up at all. I know it was Mrs. Schuyler, because the other lady, Mrs. Calvert, 31called her Emily, and the little boy told Abelard his name was Godfrey Schuyler.”

“Have you a certificate of the marriage?” was Mrs. Fordham’s next question, and her daughter replied:

“I did have, and kept it in a box Abelard gave me, but I’ve lost it. I had it out the other day with some other papers, and thought I put it back, but must have burned it and substituted for it a receipt which looked like it. Oh, mother! will people think I never was married at all, when they know it?”

The girl was crouching at her mother’s feet in such an agony of shame and fear that at first she hardly heard what her mother was saying about there being no need for people to know of the marriage.

“Godfrey is too young to remember it, or he would have recognized Abelard,” Mrs. Fordham said; “and it is not likely the two ladies thought enough of you to keep you in mind a week. There is nothing but Abelard’s peculiar name to make any impression. They might remember that.”

“No, mother.” And Heloise lifted her head quickly. “His first name was James, and as he liked that the best, he called himself ‘James A. Lyle,’ and it was so written in the certificate.”

“Then it never need be known that you made this low marriage!” Mrs. Fordham exclaimed, in a tone of intense relief.

“Mother!”—and starting up from her crouching posture, Heloise’s eyes flashed indignantly as she said,—“do you think I am ashamed of my love for Abelard, or that I will consent to act a lie all my life, even if I could do so without detection, which I cannot, for, mother, I have not told you all; the dreadful part is to come. I—I—oh! I can’t speak it. You must know what I mean.”

Heloise was at her mother’s feet again, her hands clasped together nervously, and her breath coming in quick, panting gasps, as she whispered the dreadful thing she had to tell, and then fell forward on her face, fainting entirely away.

For an instant Mrs. Fordham sat like one stunned by a heavy blow, powerless to move or speak; but her ever-active, far-seeing 32mind was busy, and before she stooped to raise her unconscious daughter, she had come to a decision.

All her hopes for the future should not be thus blasted. Her daughter should yet ride in the high places of the land, and should never be known to the world as the widow of a carpenter. She repeated the last words sneeringly, and then lifting up her child bore her to the window, where the cool evening air could blow upon her. It was not long ere Heloise came back to consciousness, but her face still wore the same white, frightened look it had put on when she whispered her secret. Ere long, however, the pallid hue changed to a scarlet flush as she listened to her mother’s plan, and her fixed purpose to carry it out. They were to leave Hampstead at once and go back to England, where in London they would for a time live in obscurity, unknown to any one save those with whom they were compelled to come in contact.

“Nobody here will believe in your marriage,” she said, as she saw Heloise about to speak, and guessed that it was to oppose her. “Your certificate is lost.”

“Yes, but Mr. Calvert must have a record; he would remember,” Heloise said, faintly; and her mother replied: “Possibly; but I do not care to have him remember. I do not wish your marriage known, and it shall not be. Hear me, Heloise, it shall not be, I say.”

“But I cannot live a lie,” the poor girl moaned, as she rocked to and fro, with her head bent down, and her whole attitude one of great mental distress.

“You forget that you have been living a lie these three months past. It is rather late now to make it a matter of conscience, and I shall not listen to such foolishness. So far as this you may be truthful. In England you may take his name. Lyle is better than Fordham, and for a time you must of course pass for a married woman; after that,—I have not decided.”

There was a hard, implacable expression in Mrs. Fordham’s face as she said this, and she looked at that moment as if capable of almost anything which would promote her own ends. Though kind and affectionate in the main she had always kept 33her daughter in a state of rigid obedience, if not subjection to her will, and she had no idea of being thwarted now. Heloise, who understood her so well and knew how useless it was to contend with so strong and fierce a spirit, felt herself powerless to oppose anything, and thus gave a tacit consent at least to her mother’s plans. For two or three days, however, she kept her room, and did not go down when Mrs. Schuyler came with little Godfrey, and asked for more of the “lovely roses.”

There was nothing said of Abelard. Lady Emily had forgotten him, and had no thought or care for the young girl watching her from the window as she flitted about the rosebush, in her dainty white morning dress, with its lace and fluted ruffles. She was not pretty at all, but her movements were very graceful, and she made a pleasant picture in the little yard, and Heloise half envied her as she thought how blessed she was in home, and husband, and children she was not ashamed to own. She was waiting now, it seemed, for the colonel, who was to take her for a drive, and who soon came down the road, and stopping before the gate asked Mrs. Fordham to come to him for a moment.

He intended raising a monument to the memory of Abelard Lyle, he said, and he would like to inquire his age, place of birth, and if he had another name than Abelard. Mrs. Fordham was sorry she could not give the desired information. Indeed, people were laboring under a misapprehension with regard to herself and the young man. He was a mere ship acquaintance, but she believed he had a mother and possibly a sister. She had never liked this country much, and was intending to return to England very soon, where she would find his friends or communicate with them in some way. Colonel Schuyler was very kind to be so much interested in the young man. She had liked him, too, so far as she knew him, but she had only done for him what she would do for any of her countrymen under similar circumstances.

Mrs. Fordham spoke loftily and decidedly, and Colonel Schuyler looked at her a little curiously as he said:

“Ah, indeed! I am sorry you don’t know his age, though 34it does not matter much. I wish you good-morning, madam.”

He lifted his hat and was turning away, when from the upper window there came a clear, ringing voice, which said:

“Colonel Schuyler, I can tell you what you wish to know. He was born in Alnwick, England; he was twenty-three last March, and his first name was James.”

“Thanks,” and Colonel Schuyler started in surprise, both at the voice and the beautiful young face, which looked so eagerly at him for an instant and then was withdrawn from sight.

“That was a most remarkable face, Emily. Do you know who the young girl is?” Colonel Schuyler asked, as he drove off with his wife.

Mrs. Schuyler believed it was the daughter of that woman, and she guessed she was rather pretty, though she did not notice her particularly.

“That class of people do sometimes produce very fine complexions and tolerably good features.”

That was the lady’s reply, and then she talked of something else, and forgot Heloise entirely. But that night, strangely enough, the colonel dreamed of that window in the cottage round which a honeysuckle was trained, and of a pale, sweet face framed in the net-work of green, and the clear, hazel eyes, which for a moment had looked at him. And, when he woke, he was conscious of a feeling of interest in the young girl, and resolved to make some inquiries concerning her. But the next day he went down to New York to order the monument for Abelard’s grave; and when, after an absence of two weeks, he returned to Hampstead, the cottage was shut up, and he learned that Mrs. Fordham had gone to England and taken her daughter with her.

Remembering what Mrs. Fordham had said to him when he went to make some inquiries concerning Abelard Lyle, he was not as much surprised as the villagers had been when they heard of Mrs. Fordham’s intention to give up her pretty cottage and return to her friends. She laid great stress upon her friends, and hinted broadly that the people of Hampstead were not to 35her taste. Nobody cared especially, though many wondered at her fickleness in changing her residence so soon. I was sorry, for I liked Heloise and hated to part with her. Remembering what she had said to me of the dreadful thing which might happen to her, and to which my championship was pledged, I felt disappointed not to have a chance of proving myself her friend, and I told her so when I went to say good-by, and found her in the little room where I had seen her on the day of the funeral. Her eyes were almost black, and there was a peculiar expression in them as she regarded me fixedly for a moment without speaking.

“Ettie,” she said at last, “I deceived you the other day. I told you Abelard was not my beau, and that—that was not quite the truth, for though he was not what you meant, he was—, I liked him, oh so much, and he liked me, and—and—oh, Ettie, I am very, very miserable.”

She was sobbing piteously, and I could only smooth her hair by way of comfort as I did not know what to say.

“Ettie,” she began again, when she had dried her eyes, “they say Colonel Schuyler is fixing up the grave and will put a grand monument there. I am thankful to him for that, but after a time he will forget all about it, and grass and weeds will grow where only flowers should be. Ettie, you like me, I think, and will you, for my sake, keep his grave up nice and pretty, and put fresh flowers there in the summer time? Put them in this vase; I give it to you for that; he bought it for me in New York.”

She placed in my hand a small vase of creamy white, with a band of gold around it, and on its side a bunch of blue forget-me-nots, in the centre of which were two hearts transfixed with a golden arrow.

“It will make me happy to know this is on his grave when I am so far away,” she added; “and, Ettie, don’t tell any one, but last night, when everybody was asleep, I went there and planted a little rosebush like that tree in the garden, you know. I am sure it will live, for it had a good root, and I want you to water it and nurse it to life, and when they put up the 36stone don’t let them trample it down. Will you do this for me?”

I promised that I would, and she went on:

“Some time when I am older and have money I shall come back to see his grave. You’ll have it nice for me, won’t you?”

I promised her again, and then, taking the scissors from the table, she cut from the back of her head one of her long, bright curls, and laying it in my hands bade me keep it as a remembrance of her.

“Mother is coming and you must go,” she said, with a little shiver, as we heard Mrs. Fordham’s voice below, and with a hurried kiss and the whispered words, “Remember about the grave, good-by, I shall see you again some time, and possibly write to you,” she pushed me toward the door, and when I saw her again she was waving her hand to me from the window of the car which took her away from Hampstead.

CHAPTER V.
EDITH LYLE.

t was a dark, dreary, January afternoon, and the dreariness and darkness were increased by the dense fog which since noon had settled like a pall over the great city of London, and by a pitiless rain, which, mixing with melting snow, ran in muddy puddles down the gutters and in dirty streams down the windows of the third floor back room of the lodging in Dorset Street, where a very young girl was lying. Her face was whiter than the pillow against which it lay, and in the eyes there was a look of utter helplessness, as if all life, and hope, and energy had been crushed out, and there was nothing left but apathy and utter indifference to the future. And yet this was the same face which Colonel Schuyler had seen framed in a net-work of green, and of whose bright beauty he had dreamed, with his lady wife beside him: 37but he would not have known it now. Months of mental anguish and continual combat with the mother’s stronger nature, added to days of intense suffering, and homesickness, and longing for the dead in that far-off grave in Hampstead, had left their marks on the young girl, until now that the crisis was past she lay quiet and passive in her mother’s hands and seemed to assent to whatever the mother proposed.

That estimable woman had chosen lodgings in Dorset Street, knowing she would be safe there from any one whom her daughter might meet in the future. The name Heloise had been dropped, and she was Edith Lyle now, a young widow, whose husband had died soon after her marriage, and so no suspicions were excited and no comments made by the few who occasionally saw her stealing up or down the stairs which led to her apartment. Only the housemaid, Mary Stover, was interested in her, or paid much heed to her extreme youth and beauty. And even Mary but seldom came in contact with her, so that Edith hardly knew of her existence, or how much she was in the serving woman’s thoughts. Since the birth of her baby, a wee little creature, with masses of golden hair and a look in its blue eyes of the dead, Edith had scarcely thought of anything, but had lain with the child held closely to her bosom, as if fearful of losing it. Baby was now four weeks old, and the impatient Mrs. Fordham could wait no longer, and on the dreary day of which I write she sat by her daughter’s side and said to her, in the tone which Edith had never yet had courage to withstand:

“Edith, you are strong enough now to leave this wretched place. Baby will be four weeks old to-morrow, and I have everything arranged. I have made particular inquiries about the —— Street Foundling Hospital, and learned that in no other place are the children so well cared for. The matron and nurses are very kind, and the little ones healthy and happy, and in nine cases out of ten are adopted by good families and grow up respectable men and women.”

“But, mother,” Edith gasped, while her hold tightened on the little pink fingers which lay on her neck, “I cannot let her 38go. She is mine,—truly, lawfully mine,—and you shall not take her from me.”

“Hush, child, you do not know what you are talking about,” came impatiently from Mrs. Fordham’s lips. “I tell you we cannot be hampered with a child, and it shall be as I say. I know it will be well cared for. I shall keep sight of her, and see that no harm befalls her, and if you ever should wish to claim it, that mark on its bosom is sufficient to identify it.”

At the mention of the peculiar birthmark on her child, Edith moaned faintly, and thought of the white rose with the blood stain in the centre, and the awful day when it was brought back to her, and she had laid it next her breaking heart. There was a blood-red spot over baby’s heart, and Edith knew how it came there, and shuddered and grew sick as she remembered it, and held tighter to the little one whom her mother would wrest from her. At last, wearied with the controversy which was exciting her daughter so much, Mrs. Fordham seemed to give up the contest, but it was only seeming. She was one who never gave up, and what she could not accomplish by fair means she was not too scrupulous to attain by foul. Baby must go. It was something in her way, and must be sacrificed; so, when the hour came round for her daughter’s medicine, she mixed with it one of the sedative powders which Edith had taken for wakefulness when her illness was at the worst. As it had been successful then so it was now, and she ere long fell into a heavy sleep, which Mrs. Fordham knew from experience would last for several hours. This was her time for action, and going to the bed she stooped to take the child from the arms which held it so fast. Even in her sleep Edith must have had a dim consciousness of the threatened danger, for she held firmly to the little one, while her white lips moaned:

“No, she is mine; you cannot have her.”

But for this Mrs. Fordham did not hesitate, and with a firm hand she carefully unclasped the clinging arms and lifted the child from the bed.

Had it been a gentleman’s offspring, and Edith the mistress 39of some luxurious home, she might have felt some love and tenderness for the little creature, which, roused from its sleep, opened its blue eyes and looked into her face. But it was lowly born, a descendant of the Lyles, who lived in obscurity among the heather hills of Alnwick, and she steeled her heart against it, and never faltered in her purpose, even when the pretty lips parted and gave forth a sound, which made Edith start and half turn upon her pillow as if about to waken. But the sedative was good, and the young girl slept on, while her mother robed the little one in its best attire, and wrote upon a bit of paper which she pinned upon its bosom:

“Her name is Heloise, and she is not a child of shame, but of an imprudent marriage, and inherits from her mother, who is a lady, some of the best blood in England.”

“That will save her from a life of servitude; the high bloods always take such children as these,” she said, “and it will be much better so than a drag on us.”

Ten minutes later and she stole softly down the stairs, bearing under her cloak a bundle which, when she retraced her steps, was not with her. But it was safe from the chill air of the night, for she had rung the bell of —— Street Hospital, and depositing her burden on the steps had retreated swiftly behind a clump of shrubbery until she saw the door opened and the child received into the warmth and light within. The rain had ceased and the fog had cleared away with the going down of the sun, but no one could have recognized her in the dim starlight, with the hood of her water-proof drawn closely over her head, and when she reached the house in Dorset Street she felt as if cut loose from everything which could in any way interfere with her ambitious projects.

Edith had slept soundly, and when at last her mother came and stood beside the bed she lay in the same deep slumber, with a bright flush on her cheeks and her arm still stretched over the spot where but an hour ago a little pink-and-white baby lay. It was gone now, but she did not know it, or dream of the anguish in store for her when she should rouse from the sleep which lasted until near midnight. Then with a sudden 40start and sense of danger she woke, and sitting up in bed felt for her child under the sheet,—on the pillow,—under the pillow,—on the counterpane,—everywhere, but all in vain. Baby was gone, and in a voice husky with fright and terror she called to the figure sitting so motionless by the fire, “Mother, mother, where is baby? Is she in your lap, mother?” and, alarmed at Mrs. Fordham’s ominous silence, Edith sprang to her side, and with a sensation as if her heart was bursting from her throat, gasped out:

“Mother, tell me;—what have you done with my child?”

And Mrs. Fordham did tell her, while Edith listened like one paralyzed beyond the power to move. Speak she could not at first, for a horrible suffocating sensation in her throat; but her face was deadly pale and her lips quivered, while the fury of a tigress when bereft of its young glared from her eyes. At last she found her voice, and the words rang through the room with terrible distinctness.

“Mother, may God’s curse fall on you, if a hair of baby’s head is harmed, and if, when I am strong and well, and able to cope with you, I fail to find my darling may He turn every happiness I ever hope to know into sorrow, and blight the dearest earthly wish I may ever have again.”

Then she fell fainting at the feet of her mother, who, if not moved by the denunciation against herself, was alarmed at the death-like unconsciousness which lasted so long. But youth and health can endure much and live, and Edith came back to life and sense again, but lay utterly prostrate and helpless, with a choking lump in her throat which prevented her from speaking above the faintest whisper. To move her that day to other and better quarters was impossible, nor did Mrs. Fordham care particularly to do it. No one there would know of the child’s absence, for no one ever came into their room except Mary Stover, who was always quiet and respectful, and who on this day when she brought up warm water for the tea, never spoke or seemed to notice anything.

Next morning Edith was better, and when Mary came with the breakfast she was bidden to tell her mistress that Mrs. 41Fordham was going away at once, but would pay the month’s rent just the same.

“Very well, ma’am. I’ll tell her when she comes in. She’s out marketin’ now,” was the girl’s reply as she left the room; and when Mrs. Jones, the owner of the house, returned, her late lodgers were gone, and Mary handed her the rent for the whole month, as Mrs. Fordham had bidden her to do.

Mrs. Jones was surprised at the sudden departure of people of whom she had been a little proud, inasmuch as they were above the class which usually stopped with her, but the money for the whole month and the certainty that she knew of other lodgers to take the rooms, kept her quiet, and she merely said:

“They were in a mighty hurry to be off. Do you know where they are gone?”

Mary did not. A handsome carriage had come for them, and madam almost carried the young lady to it, she said, adding:

“That was a very pretty lass, with the sweetest face I ever saw.”

To this Mrs. Jones assented, and as just then there was a ring, and people were announced looking for rooms, her late tenants passed as completely from her mind as they passed from her surroundings to a new life in a pleasanter part of London.

CHAPTER VI.
THE BEGINNING OF A NEW LIFE.

he shock of finding her baby gone, together with the removal from Dorset Street, in her weak state brought on another faint; and when the carriage stopped before the house in the vicinity of Belgrave Square, Edith lay unconscious in the arms of her mother, who carried her up the steps and into the large airy room, where for a time they were to stay until she had decided upon her future course, and her daughter’s health was restored. In a few weeks at most they should move again, Mrs. Fordham thought, but in 42this she was mistaken. Edith did not rally; the fainting fit was succeeded by a low nervous fever, which lasted for so long that the hedge roses were in blossom, and the breath of early summer was stealing in at her window when she was at last able to walk across the floor.

“Now, mother,” she said one morning, when for the first time in months she was dressed and sitting up. “Now, you must go for baby; go to-day,—will you,—or shall I send some one else?”

She spoke decidedly, and Mrs. Fordham, who felt that there was a change in her daughter, and that henceforth their relations to each other must be different from what they had heretofore been, did not oppose her, but answered, readily:

“I will go myself;” and an hour later she stood again at the door of —— Street Foundling Hospital. She was a clergyman’s widow, she said, and had come to make inquiries concerning a child named Heloise, which was left there some time in January. Could they tell her anything about it?

They could tell her, and they did, and with a throbbing of the heart and a relieved expression on her face, she started home, where Edith was waiting for her.

“Where is it, mother?” was the question asked eagerly.

“Edith, baby is dead. It only lived three weeks, they told me. It was born, it seems, with some affection of the heart, which, under any circumstances, would have ended its life in a short time, the physician said. It had every possible care, and died with little or no pain. I was particular to inquire about that, as I knew you would wish to know. There, there, my child, don’t take it so hard,” and Mrs. Fordham laid her hand on the bowed head of the sorrowing girl, who was weeping passionately. “It was wrong perhaps to take it from you, and I am sorry now did it. I thought then it was for the best, for a baby would be in our way. Forgive me, Edith, and let us bury the past forever.”

She stooped to kiss her daughter, in whose mind there was no shadow of doubt that what her mother had told her was true. Her baby was dead, and though she mourned for it truly she 43knew that it was far better off in heaven than in that hospital, with only strangers to care for it; and gradually, as the days went by and she felt her strength and health coming back again, the sense of loss and pain which at first had weighed so heavily upon her, began to give way, and more than one of the lodgers in the house noticed and commented upon the great beauty of the young girl, whom they sometimes met upon the stairs or saw sitting by her window. They knew the grave woman dressed in widow’s weeds was Mrs. Fordham, and as the young girl was her daughter they naturally supposed her to be Miss Fordham, a mistake which the mother took no pains to rectify; while Edith, who had suffered so much, began to feel an utter inability to oppose her own will to that of her mother, and when the latter said to her, “It is not necessary for you to explain to others that your name is not Fordham,” she passively acquiesced: and thus none of the lodgers ever heard the name of Lyle, or dreamed of that grave across the sea at Schuyler Hill, or the dreary room in Dorset Street, and the scenes enacted there. All these were buried in the past, and there was nothing in the way of Mrs. Fordham’s plans, except, indeed, the means to carry them out.

Once the mother had hoped much from her daughter’s voice, which was a fine contralto of great power and compass; but that hope was gone, for on the dreadful day when, with the fury of a tigress, Edith had invoked Heaven’s curse upon her mother if so much as a hair of baby’s head was harmed, it seemed as if a hand of iron had clutched her throat with a remorseless grasp, which had for a time deprived her of her powers of utterance, except in a hoarse whisper. At intervals, even now, she felt the grip of those fingers, and would start suddenly with a sense of suffocation, which soon passed away, and left her breathing free as ever. But the glorious voice did not come back, and though she sometimes sang some sweet, low song, her voice was very weak, and a musical education, so far as singing was concerned, was of course out of the question; but for all other branches the best of teachers were procured, and Edith, who possessed a fondness for books, progressed 44so rapidly as to astonish even herself, while her mother would have been perfectly content but for one little annoyance which haunted her continually, and which increased with every succeeding day. Her finances were fearfully low; nor did she know where aid was to come from.

Since leaving Dorset Street she had assumed a mode of life far above her means, and she was seriously considering the propriety of taking lodgers herself instead of being lodged, when fortune sent in her way a kind, simple-hearted old man, with less of brains than money, as was proved by his offering himself to Mrs. Fordham, whose comely face and dignified bearing attracted his fancy, and who accepted him at once and became Mrs. Dr. Barrett, with a pleasant home in a quiet part of London, and money enough to supply every comfort of life, as well as some of its luxuries.

Though twice married Dr. Barrett had never had a child, and his kind, fatherly heart went out at once to Edith, whom he loved and treated as a daughter, and who spent under his roof the happiest, most peaceful years of her life.

As it is not my intention to narrate in detail the incidents of those years, during which Edith was first a pupil, then a governess, and then an organist at St. John’s, I shall pass over them silently, and take my readers with me to a time when in her full maturity of beauty and grace, such as few women have ever possessed, she stood just on the verge of the brilliant life her mother had so desired for her, and which proved to be so different from anything of which the wily, scheming woman had dreamed.

CHAPTER VII.
ELEVEN YEARS LATER.

r. Barrett was dead; and as with his life the income ceased which had made Mrs. Fordham so comfortable, she was again reduced to the necessity of earning her daily bread, which she did by doing plain sewing, and letting 45two or three rooms of the little cottage, which was all her husband had left her.

Edith was not with her. For two years or more she had been the companion of a Mrs. Sinclair, a wealthy invalid, who had advertised for some young person who was a good reader and did not object to sick people. The salary offered was not large, but as there was a prospect of permanency, Edith had answered the advertisement in person and been preferred to scores of others, who sought for the place. For six months and more Mrs. Sinclair had been abroad, but she was now in her pleasant home, a few miles from London, and on the summer morning of which I write she lay on the couch in her sitting-room, which opened upon the terrace, where, on a rustic bench beneath the shadow of a maple tree, a young girl was sitting, her white hands holding idly the book she was not reading, and her eyes looking far away, as if in quest of something never found. That was Edith, whom one would hardly recognize, so entirely changed was she in style, and manner, and general appearance. The bright color which had once been so noticeable was gone, and her complexion was clear and white, and smooth as marble, save when some sudden emotion called a faint color to her cheek. The eyes, too, were darker now, and when kindling with excitement, seemed almost black with the long curling lashes which shaded them. There was also a darker shade on the beautiful golden brown hair, which was coiled in heavy braids around her well-shaped head, and added to her apparent height. Perfect in form and face, graceful in manner, always self-possessed and ready, with the right word in the right place, Edith Lyle was a favorite wherever she went, and, during the two years she had been with Mrs. Sinclair, that lady had learned to love her as a sister, and treated her with all the consideration of a friend and equal. And Edith was very happy, save when a thought of the past came over her, and then there would steal into her eyes a look of pain, and the muscles about her mouth would contract, as if she were forcing back words she longed to utter, but dared not.

Her marriage was still a secret to every one save her mother. 46Even Dr. Barrett had known nothing of it until just before he died, when she told him her story, and begged him not to hate her, because it was not earlier told.

The doctor was surprised, but not angry, and, laying his hand fondly on the young girl’s head, he said:

“Poor child, you have suffered a great deal, and I pity you so much; but I am not angry,—no, no. I reckon your mother is right. She generally is. She’s a most wonderful woman for business. You’ll get on better as a girl than you would as a widow,—that is, you’ll be saved a great deal of idle, curious questioning, and make a better match by and by. With that face and that manner of yours, you ought to marry a title; as Widow Lyle you could not. Had the child lived it would be different; now it is dead, you had better let matters remain as they are. It will please your mother so, and be quite as well for you.”

This was the doctor’s advice, which lifted a heavy load from Edith’s mind. Perhaps it was better to keep silent with regard to her marriage, she thought, especially as no one could be harmed by it; and gradually, as time passed on, she came to think of the past as a horrible dream, from which she had awakened to find the horror gone and the sunlight of content, if not of happiness, still shining around her. She, however, preferred her real name, and when she went to Mrs. Sinclair it was as Edith Lyle, and when that lady on hearing her mother mentioned as Mrs. Barrett asked how that was, Edith replied:

“Mother has been married twice. Dr. Barrett was my stepfather.”

Thus Mrs. Sinclair had no suspicion of the truth, and soon learned to regard Miss Lyle as more than a mere hired companion, and was never long easy when away from her. On the day of which I write, they had returned the previous night after an absence of several months, and, attracted by the freshness of the morning and the beauty of the grounds, Edith had left Mrs. Sinclair to read the pile of letters she found awaiting her, and stolen out to her favorite seat beneath the maples, where, through an opening in the distant trees of the park, she could 47catch glimpses of the Thames and the great city with its forest of spires and domes. And as she sat there in her tasteful cambric wrapper, with only a bit of blue ribbon at her throat and in her hair, no one who saw her would have dreamed of that tragedy of by-gone years in which she had been so greatly interested, and of which she was thinking that June morning, so like that day at Schuyler Hill when the brightness of her life had so suddenly been stricken out. Should she ever go there again,—ever see that grave which Ettie had promised to keep against her coming? Yes. She would go alone some time across the sea, and lay her face upon the grass which covered her lost love, and tell him of the child that died and whose grave she never saw.

“But I will see it before I go,” she said; “I will find where they laid my little one, and it may be—”

She did not finish the sentence, for just then the silvery stroke of a bell reached her ear and she knew she was wanted within. She found Mrs. Sinclair with many letters lying open before her, and one in her hand which she had evidently just read, and which seemed to disturb her.

“I am sorry to call you when I know how fresh and bright it is out doors,” she said, as Edith came to her side, “but I find here a letter, written weeks ago, which must be answered at once. It is from my brother——”

“Your brother!” Edith repeated, in some surprise, for that was the first allusion she had ever heard Mrs. Sinclair make to any near relatives.

“Yes, my half brother Howard,” was the reply. “I’ve never spoken of him because—because,—well, there was a kind of coldness between us on account of his wife, whom I did not like. He brought her here when they were first married, and had she been a duchess she could not have borne herself more loftily than she did. I did not think her manners in good taste, and told my brother so; and as he was in the heyday of his honeymoon and saw nothing amiss in his Emily, we had a little tiff and parted coldly, and I have not seen him since. Regularly at the birth of his children he has written to me, and just 48before you came he wrote to say that Emily was dead. I answered, of course, and said I was sorry for him, and that I should be glad to see him and his children. There are three of them, and the eldest, a boy, bears my maiden and married name, Godfrey Sinclair Schuyler——”

“Schuyler!” Edith said, and if possible, her always white face was a shade paler than its wont at the sound of that name.

But Mrs. Sinclair was intent on her letter, and did not look at her as she replied:

“Yes, my brother is Howard Schuyler, and his father, who was of English descent, married my mother, Mrs. Godfrey, when I was seven years old, and took us to New York, where mother died when Howard was a baby. I stayed in New York till I was seventeen, and then came back to live with my aunt and have seen but little of Howard since.”

“And does he live in New York!” Edith asked; and Mrs. Sinclair replied:

“Yes, or rather a little way out, in the town called Hampstead, on the Hudson river. He has a beautiful place, I am told, which they call Schuyler Hill.”

“And you have news from him?” Edith said next, her heart beating rapidly at the lady’s reply.

“Yes. He is in Scotland, it seems, and wrote to know if I could receive him and his son Godfrey about this time,—let me see, the 15th of June he said, and this is the 14th. I was to answer at once, and direct to Edinburgh, where he would wait my reply. His letter was written ten days ago, and I am so much afraid he has become impatient at not hearing from me, that he will perhaps go directly to the continent without stopping here at all. My head feels so badly, would you mind writing a few lines for me, just to say that I am home, and shall be glad to see him?”

“Certainly not,” Edith answered in a voice which did not in the least betray the storm of feeling she experienced at being thus unexpectedly brought face to face as it were with a past she had almost outlived.

To stay in that room with Mrs. Sinclair while she wrote to 49Colonel Schuyler was impossible, and asking permission to withdraw, she went to her own chamber to be alone while she penned a letter which by some one of those subtle emotions or presentiments which none can explain, she felt would influence her whole future life. She could not understand it, nor did she attempt to seek a reason for it, but she felt certain that Colonel Schuyler was the arbiter of her fate, and that with his coming would begin a new era for her, and her hand trembled so at first that she could scarcely hold the pen, and much less write a word. At last she commenced:

“Oakwood, June 14th, 18—, Colonel Schuyler,” and there she stopped, overpowered with the memories which the sight of that name evoked. Once more she stood with her lover at the garden gate, and saw the night fog creeping across the river, and heard in the distance the faint rumble of the fast coming train which had thundered by just as she gave her boy-husband the last good-by kiss, and fastened in his buttonhole the rose, which she still carefully preserved together with a silken curl cut from baby’s head during the first days of her maternity.

How every little thing connected with that curl and rose came back to her now, and for an instant she felt faint and sick again, just as she had felt when they brought the dead man in and carried him out again. In her desolation she had said: “I hate the Schuylers,” and she almost hated them now, even though she knew them innocent of any wrong to her. Col. Schuyler she remembered as a tall, fine-looking man, and she had him in her mind just as he was when he stood in the garden path and glanced wonderingly up at her as she called out the name and age and birth-place of the poor youth whose memory he wished to honor. That was the only time he had ever seen her, and she had no fear that he would recognize her now. So it was not this which made her tremble as she again took up her pen to bid him come to Oakwood, his sister’s country-seat. It was a shrinking from she did not know what, and after the letter was written and approved by Mrs. Sinclair, she felt tempted to tear it up instead of giving it to the servant whose 50duty it was to post it. But this she dared not do, and the letter was sent on its way, and as soon as it was possible to receive an answer one came to Mrs. Sinclair, who read aloud at the breakfast table:

“Dear Sister Helen:—Yours of the 14th received and contents noted. Shall probably be with you the day after you get this. Godfrey will accompany me.

“Truly, your brother, Howard.”
“That is so like Howard,” Mrs. Sinclair said. “‘Short and crisp and right to the point.’ One would almost think he had no heart, and yet I know he has, though he is very peculiar in some things, very reserved, and very proud, and a great stickler for justice and honor. Why, I do not suppose he would say or act a thing he did not mean even to save his life or that of his best friend.”

“Yes,” Edith said, idly toying with her spoon and feeling a still greater dread of this man of honor, who would not act a lie to save his life. “Yes: how old is he?”

“How old? let me see. I was past eight when he was born, and I am forty-nine; that makes him almost forty-one; quite a young man still, and fine-looking, too. I dare say he will marry again;” and, glancing across the table at the beautiful lady sitting there, a curious thought sprang into Mrs. Sinclair’s mind, which, however, had no echo in Edith’s heart.

She had asked Col. Schuyler’s age more for the sake of saying something than from any curiosity, and she hardly heard Mrs. Sinclair’s reply, so little did she care. His age or personal appearance was nothing to her. It was his presence in the house she dreaded, because it would awaken so many unpleasant memories, and take her back to a time she had almost forgotten in the pain which had come to her during the later years. But he was coming to-morrow, and at Mrs. Sinclair’s request she herself saw that his room and Godfrey’s were made ready, and then at another request from her mistress she practised her best instrumental pieces, for “Howard used to be fond of music, and was sure to like Miss Lyle’s playing.”

51“Try that little Scotch ballad, please. I thought your voice stronger when you sang it to me last. Strange that it should have left you so suddenly! What was the cause of it, did you say?” Mrs. Sinclair asked.

“A sudden shock to my nerves when I was sick,” was Edith’s reply, and she felt again the iron fingers on her throat, and that choking sensation as if her heart were leaping from her mouth.

Mrs. Sinclair was very fond of music, especially of singing, and knowing this, Edith had frequently sang to her some simple ballads which were written so low as to come within the compass of her weak voice, but she could not do it now, and excusing herself, she rose from the piano saying she had a headache and needed fresh air.

“I have not seen mother since my return. She was out the day I called, and if you are willing I would like to go into town this morning; the ride will do me good.”

Mrs. Sinclair was willing, and accordingly an hour later a handsome carriage stopped before Mrs. Dr. Barrett’s gate, and Edith went slowly up the walk toward the open door.

CHAPTER VIII.
MOTHER AND DAUGHTER.

he world had not gone very well with Mrs. Dr. Barrett since her husband’s death. Her house was too small to admit of many lodgers, and as those who came were mostly Americans, they did not stop long, and required so much of her that she was glad when they left, hoping to do better the next time. A pain under her left shoulder made it hard for her to sew, and but for Edith’s generosity she would have been badly off. Edith was very kind to her, and gave her the larger part of her salary, and Mrs. Barrett was very proud of her daughter, even though that daughter had sorely disappointed her in not having married or shown any disposition 52to do so, nor, so far as Mrs. Barrett knew, had she received but one offer, and that from so questionable a quarter that a refusal was the only alternative. She had been away from home when Edith called upon her the day following her return from the Continent, but she found the card which Edith left, and when her maid glowingly described the carriage, and the beautiful young lady who came in it, she said, with a great deal of pride, “That was my daughter.”

“And sure she walked as if the ground wasn’t good enough for her to step on,” was Kitty’s mental comment, as she wondered at the difference between mother and child.

After that day Mrs. Barrett was constantly expecting Edith, and once she thought of going to Oakwood to see her, but on the occasion of her first and only visit there, Mrs. Sinclair, whose likes and dislikes were very strong, had conceived a great aversion for her, and had intimated to Edith that though she was at liberty to visit her mother when she pleased, it was not desirable that the latter should come often to Oakwood. Knowing this, Mrs. Barrett did not like to venture, and she remained at home, waiting impatiently for Edith until the morning when she saw at last the well-known carriage at the gate, and Edith coming up the walk.

How beautiful she was, and how like a princess she looked even in her simple muslin dress and straw hat, with a lace scarf around her graceful shoulders. Everything which Edith wore became her well, and now with a faint flush on her cheeks and a sparkle in her eyes, she had never seemed fairer to the proud mother than when she swept into the house with a grace and dignity peculiarly her own, and put up her lips to be kissed. Mrs. Barrett was glad to see her, and asked her many questions concerning her journey, and admired her dress, and scarf, and boots, and gloves, and asked what they cost, and told about herself, how she had but one lodger now, and that he found fault with everything, and that the day before she had received application for rooms from a respectable looking woman, who seemed to belong to the middle or lower class. “Indeed, she said, she had been out to service before her marriage, but that 53her husband had left her a few shares in the —— Bank, so that she was quite comfortable now.

“I never thought I would take any one who was not first-class,” Mrs. Barrett said, “but my purse is so low that I should have made an exception in favor of Mrs. Rogers if she had not told me her cousin was waiting-maid at Oakwood.”

“Oh, that is Norah Long,” Edith answered indifferently, and her mother continued:

“It seemed like coming down, to lodge and serve a cousin of Mrs. Sinclair’s maid, and when she said she had a little girl about eleven years old, and that she wished her to have a room by herself, I made that an excuse for refusing her. I could not give up my best room to a child, I said, and I did not care to take children, anyway.”

“I think you were very foolish, mother; if this Mrs. Rogers would pay well, and is respectable, why not take her as soon as another? The child is certainly no objection, and it might be pleasant to have it in the house.”

“Perhaps so, but I did not like the woman’s manner. When she asked for the extra room I told her it belonged to my daughter, Miss Lyle, who was travelling with Mrs. Sinclair, of Oakwood. ‘Oh, Miss Lyle,’ she said, ‘I have heard my cousin speak of her. She is very beautiful, I believe.’ I thought her impertinent, and answered, ‘People call her so. Can I do anything more for you?’ Even then she did not go, but offered me a shilling more than my price for the rooms. Indeed, she seemed resolved to have them, and only a positive refusal on the ground of not liking to have the child availed to send her away. I never thought I should be reduced so low that the cousin of a servant would insist upon lodging with me,” and Mrs. Barrett began to break down a little; then rousing herself, she said, suddenly, “Edith, will you never marry and raise me out of this? Did you find no one abroad?”

“No one, mother,” and Edith flushed to her forehead, while her voice had in it a tone of irritation, as she continued: “How many times must I tell you that I do not go about the country trying to sell myself. I am willing to work for you as long as 54I have strength, but marry I never shall, and probably could not if I would.”

“You, with that face, say you could not marry!” Mrs. Barrett exclaimed.

And Edith rejoined:

“The man who would take me for my face alone I do not want, and the man whom I could respect enough to marry must know all my past, and, after knowing it, how many, think you, would care to have me?”

There was a gesture of impatience on the part of Mrs. Barrett, but, before she could speak, Edith continued:

“Colonel Schuyler, of Schuyler Hill, is expected at Oakwood to-morrow.”

“Colonel Schuyler!” and Mrs. Barrett was surprised. “How does he happen to come to Oakwood?”

“He is Mrs. Sinclair’s half brother. I never knew it until the other day, and Lady Emily is dead, and he is travelling in Europe with Godfrey.”

“Lady Emily dead! She was a sweet-mannered lady, and young, too. Why, Colonel Schuyler cannot be very old. Not much past forty, I am sure, and he was very fine-looking.”

Edith had risen to go, and did not in the least understand what was in her mother’s mind; and buttoning her long gloves, she said:

“While Colonel Schuyler is there, Mrs. Sinclair’s time will be occupied with him, and she will not have so much need of me. I will try to see you oftener. I wish I could take you out of this altogether, mother, for I know how distasteful the life is to you after having known one so much better; but my salary is not large, and Mrs. Sinclair will never raise it. It is a principle of hers to give so much and no more. If she were not so kind, I would try for another situation.”

“No, no,” the mother said, in some alarm; “don’t leave Oakwood on any account. I’ve always felt that something would come of your being there. I can do very well as I am, only it was humiliating to have that Mrs. Rogers, who had been in service, come to me for rooms, and act as if she were my equal.”

55“I do not see it in that light, mother,” Edith said. “If Mrs. Rogers is respectable, and can pay, I advise you to take her. It is far better to have some one permanently, than the changing, floating class you usually have about you. Beside that, it must be pleasanter to have a decent woman in the house than a lot of foreign men of whom you know nothing. Suppose I speak to Norah, and tell her you will take her cousin if she has not secured apartments elsewhere; and if she wants my old room for her child, let her have it. I do not occupy it often, and would rather some nice little girl was in it than any one else. Yes, I think I’ll speak to Norah.” And without waiting for her mother to object, even if she wished to do so, Edith went hastily down the walk to the carriage waiting for her.

She found Mrs. Sinclair asleep, and Norah mending a lace handkerchief for her outside the door.

“Norah,” she said, “has your cousin, Mrs. Rogers, yet suited herself with lodgings?”

“No, ma’am. She was just here. You must have met her and the little girl somewhere in the park. You would have noticed the child.”

But Edith had been too much occupied with her own thoughts as she drove through the park to see the woman and child sitting on a bench beneath the trees, and looking curiously at her as she drove by.

“No, I met no one,” she said; “but I wish you would see your cousin, and tell her that Mrs. Barrett, of Caledonia Street, No. —, will accommodate her with rooms.”

“Two rooms?” Norah asked.

And Edith replied:

“Yes, two rooms, if she likes, and pays in advance.”

“She’s sure to do that,” Norah answered, quickly; “and she’s able, too. Her man left her well beforehand, and the child has something, too. That’s what makes Mary,—my cousin, please,—so careful of her. She isn’t her own, you see; she’s adopted, and has a little money, and Mary worships her as something different from common ones; and well she may, for a sweeter, prettier lass was never born in England than little Gertie Westbrooke.”

56There was a sound in Mrs. Sinclair’s room, and Edith hastened to remove her hat and scarf so as to be in readiness for the lady when she was needed, and what Norah had said to her of her cousin and the child was scarcely heeded, except, indeed, the name, Gertie Westbrooke, which struck her as very pretty, and twice that day she caught herself repeating it, while in her dreams that night it seemed constantly in her mind; and when at an early hour she woke from a troubled sleep, her chamber was full of the faint echoes of the name of the little girl who was to occupy her old room and bed in Caledonia Street.

CHAPTER IX.
GODFREY SCHUYLER.

t was the day after Edith’s visit to her mother, and taking advantage of the hour when Mrs. Sinclair took her after-lunch nap, she went out with her book into the grounds, and strolled on until she came to a clump of trees at the farthest extremity of the park, where was a little rustic chair. This had always been her favorite resort, the place she sought when she wished to be alone, and here she sat down, ostensibly to read, but really to think,—not so much of the past as of the future. That her kind, indulgent mistress, who had been an invalid for so many years, was failing fast, was very apparent to her experienced eyes, and only that morning she had observed that the handkerchief Mrs. Sinclair held to her lips after a paroxysm of coughing had a faint coloring of blood upon it.

“And where shall I find a home like this when she is gone?” Edith asked herself, sadly. “I might go back to mother and help her with her sewing, and take Kitty’s place,” she said, shuddering a little as she thought of the small house in Caledonia Street, so different from the pleasant home which had been hers for more than two years.

She might go out as a governess again, but when she remembered the insult which she had twice received when a governess, 57once from the young man of the house, who looked upon her as lawful prey, and once from the master, a brutal wretch who could not withstand her beauty, she thought any life preferable to that. Her face and manner were both against her, and if Mrs. Sinclair died, her only safety was in her mother’s house.

“Yes, that will be the end of it,” she said, a little bitterly, as she remembered all her mother had hoped for her and what she had once hoped for herself.

So much was she absorbed in these reflections that she did not at first see the two gentlemen who had entered the Park by a side gate, and were walking slowly up the path, which led directly past the chair in which she was sitting. Two young gentlemen she thought them, for one at least was very young, with a supple, springy grace in every movement, while the other, whose step was quite as rapid, though it had more dignity and character in it, could not be old; or even middle-aged, with that fine, erect form, that heavy, silken beard, and wealth of dark brown hair. That it could be Col. Schuyler and his son she never dreamed, for though Mrs. Sinclair had said her brother was not forty-one, Edith, who, like most young people, held forty as an age bordering on antediluvianism, thought of him always as a grayish-haired man, with a stoop, perhaps, and a slow tread, and not at all like this man coming so swiftly toward her, and pointing out something in the Park to his companion. He had evidently been at Oakwood before, for she heard him say:

“We ought to see the house from this point. This must be a new path since I was here, and yet I remember that little foot-bridge. Your mother and I used often to come down to it; she liked to see the water falling over the white stones. That was nineteen years ago.”

“Hush-sh, father! look, there’s a young lady sitting in the shadow of those trees,” came warningly from the younger man, or boy, and then with a great heart throb, Edith knew who the strangers were and arose to her feet.

They were quite up to her now, and both removed their hats and stood with heads uncovered, while the elder said to her:

58“I beg your pardon, miss, but will this path take us directly to the house at Oakwood? I was here many years ago and ought to know the way, but it seems a little strange to me.”

His voice was very pleasant and his manner deferential as he stood looking at her, while Edith replied that the path did lead directly to the house, which could be seen as soon as he reached the slight elevation yonder. Then with eyes cast down she stood waiting for him to pass on, she thinking of that one time when she had spoken to him from the window of the cottage in far-off Hampstead, and he thinking of the marvellous beauty of her face, and wondering who she could be.

“Some guest at Oakwood, undoubtedly,” he thought, and then he put another question to her and said, “Do you know if Mrs. Sinclair is at home this morning? I am her brother, Colonel Schuyler, from America, and this is my son Godfrey.”

With a bow to both gentlemen Edith replied:

“Mrs. Sinclair is at home, and is expecting you. I am Edith Lyle, Mrs. Sinclair’s hired companion.”

She said this proudly, and with a purpose not to deceive the gentlemen with regard to her position longer than was necessary. She had so often been spoken to by strangers in just the respectful, deferential tone with which Colonel Schuyler had addressed her, and then had seen the look of unmistakable interest give place to one of surprise and indifference when her real position was known, that she wished to start fair with these guests of her employer, and she was neither astonished nor disappointed when she saw the peculiar look she knew so well steal over the grave, proud face of Colonel Schuyler, who bowed as he said:

“Oh, yes. I knew she had some young person staying with her. Thanks for your directions. We shall find our way now very well. Come, Godfrey.”

But Godfrey was in no particular haste. A beautiful girl was attractive to him under all circumstances, whether the daughter of a hundred earls or the paid companion of his aunt, and his manner had not changed one whit when Edith announced herself as his inferior according to the creed of the beau monde.

59“Come, my son,” Colonel Schuyler said again, and then Godfrey passed on with a look at Edith, which plainly meant: “I’d enough sight rather stay with you, but you see it’s impossible.”

It was the old, old story; contempt from the older ones and impertinence from the younger so soon as she was known for a dependant, Edith thought, and a few hot, resentful tears trickled through the white fingers she pressed to her eyes as the two men walked away and were lost to view over the hill. And yet for once she was mistaken. Colonel Schuyler had felt no contempt for her; he never felt that for any woman, and the change in his manner, when he found who she was, was involuntary, and owing wholly to his early training, which had built a barrier between himself and those who earned their daily bread! He had taken Edith for the possible young lady of some noble house, and was disappointed to find her only the companion of his sister, but a lady still, judging from her manners and speech; while Godfrey would sooner have parted with his right hand than have been rude to any woman.

A dress, whether it hung in slatternly folds around a washerwoman, or adorned the daughter of a duchess, was sacred in his eyes, and though in a certain way he had all the pride of the Schuylers and Rossiters combined, it was a pride which prompted him to treat every one kindly. His mother, who had been very fond of him, had done her best to make him understand that, as a Rossiter and Schuyler, it behooved him to demean himself like one worthy of so illustrious a line of ancestry; but Godfrey did not care for ancestry, nor blood, nor social distinctions, and played with every ragged boy in Hampstead, and sat for hours with old Peterkin the cobbler, and kept little Johnnie Mack at Schuyler Hill all day when his mother was out working, and the child would have been alone but for this thoughtfulness. Everybody knew Godfrey Schuyler, and everybody liked him, especially the middle and poorer classes, to whom he was as the brightness of the morning.

An intolerable tease, Godfrey was something of a terror to his eldest sister Julia, whose imperious and sometimes insolent manners 60he mimicked and ridiculed, while to Alice Creighton of New York, who he knew had been selected for his wife, he was a perpetual source of joy and annoyance,—joy when he treated her with that tenderness and gentleness so natural to him in his intercourse with girls, and annoyance when even with his arm around her waist he mimicked her affected ways and her constant allusions to “when I was abroad.”

In stature Godfrey was tall, with a graceful, willowy form, a bright, though rather dark complexion, soft, laughing blue eyes, with a world of mischief in them, and rich brown hair which clustered in curls about his forehead, and which he parted in the middle until his sister Julia, who did not like it, called him a prig and an ape, while Alice, who did like it, said it was “pretty, and just as the young noblemen wore their hair when she was abroad.” That was enough for Godfrey. If Alice Creighton liked it because she saw it abroad, he surely would not follow the fashion, and the next morning at breakfast his curly locks were parted on the side very near to his left ear, and a black ribbon bound two or three times around his head to keep his refractory hair in its place.

“If ever he went abroad he hoped he should not make a fool of himself,” he said, and now that he was abroad, he bristled all over with nationality, and wore his country outside as plainly as if he had had placarded on his back, “I am an American, and proud of it, too.”

Nothing was quite equal to New York in his estimation, and he was particularly averse to the rosy, healthy-looking girls whom he everywhere met, and in his first letters to his sisters and Alice he told them they were beauties compared with the English girls; “even if Alice’s nose was a pug and Jule’s forehead so low that it took a microscope to find it, and Em’s ankles no bigger than a pair of knitting-needles.”

But when he came upon Edith Lyle, in her simple white wrapper, with her perfectly transparent complexion, and the knot of blue ribbon in her golden-brown hair, he acknowledged to himself that here at last, even on English soil, was a woman more beautiful than anything he had ever seen across the water, 61and he took off his hat and stood uncovered before her as readily as if she had been the queen. That she was only his aunt’s companion, instead of the high-born lady he had at first supposed her to be, made no difference with him. She was a woman, and as he reached the little hill beyond where she was sitting, he turned to look at her again, and said:

“By George, father, isn’t she a beauty?”

Mr. Schuyler knew to whom his son referred, and answered, in his usual grave, quiet way:

“She had a fine profile, I thought. Yes, certainly, a remarkable profile.”

They were near the house by this time, and in the excitement of meeting with his sister and the long conversation which followed, Colonel Schuyler hardly thought of Edith again until dinner was announced and she came in with Godfrey. That young man had soon grown tired of listening to talk about people and things dating back to a time he could not remember, and had sauntered out into the grounds in quest of Edith, who was more to his taste than the close drawing-room and the invalid on the couch.

Edith was in the summer-house now, and Godfrey joined her there, and in his pleasant, winning way asked if he was intruding, and if he might come in and occupy one of the chairs, which looked so tempting under the green vines.

“It was an awful bore to hear old folks talk about a lot of antediluvians,” he said; “and if she did not mind he would sit with her awhile.”

Edith nodded assent and motioned him to a chair, which he took, and removing his soft hat and brushing back his curls, he said:

“Now let us talk.”

To talk was Godfrey’s delight; and to Edith’s interrogatory:

“What shall we talk about?” he replied:

“Whatever you like;” and when she rejoined:

“Tell me of yourself and your home in America,” he mentally pronounced her a fine girl, with no nonsense about her; and in less than an hour had told nearly all he knew of himself 62and of his family. They had a splendid place in Hampstead, he said, not so big and rambling as the fine houses in England, but pleasanter every way, and more home-like, with such a fine view of the Hudson and the blue mountains beyond.

“You have never been in America?” he said, affirmatively, thus saving Edith the necessity of answering, “and so you do not know how beautiful the Hudson is. Why, it beats the Rhine all to nothing.”

“Have you seen the Rhine?” Edith asked, smiling at this enthusiastic youth, so wholly American.

“No,” and Godfrey blushed as he met her smile; “but I’ve read of it, and heard Alice Creighton rave about it by the hour, and still I know the Hudson is ahead. You ought to see it once in the neighborhood of the Highlands; the view from our tower is magnificent, with those blue peaks stretching away in the distance, and rising one above the other until I used to think them the stairs which led to Heaven.”

How Edith’s heart throbbed as she listened to his description of a place she, too, knew so well, though of her knowledge she dared not give a sign; and how she longed to question her companion of that grave on the hillside! But she could not, and as Godfrey evidently expected her to say something, she asked if he had always lived in Hampstead.

“No; I was born on Fifth Avenue, in a brown-stone front, so that the first breath I drew was sufficiently stuffy and aristocratic; but I went to the country when I was five or six years old. Father took the old house down and built the new one. I never shall forget it,—never, for the dreadful thing which happened.”

Edith knew just what was coming, and steeled herself to listen to the details of that tragedy which had colored her whole life. Again the fingers of iron were clutching her throat, while Godfrey told of the young man whom he liked so much, and who had saved another’s life at the loss of his own.

“And when they reached him, the grass was red with blood, and he lay white, and still, and dead.”

Godfrey’s voice trembled as he said these words, and he 63paused a moment in his tale, while Edith clasped her hands tightly together and tried to speak, but could not for the smothered sensation choking and stifling her so.

“We buried him in our own lot, and bought him a grand monument, and there are many flowers round, the spot,” Godfrey continued: and then he glanced at Edith, and starting up, exclaimed: “Why, what is the matter? You are whiter than a ghost. You are not going to faint? You must not faint! I don’t know what to do with girls who faint. Alice did it once, or made believe, and I kissed her and brought her to quick.”

He did not kiss Edith, but he fanned her with his soft hat until she waved him off, and found voice to say:

“It is the heat, and your vivid description of that poor fellow’s death. Did you tell me he was married?”

She asked the question from an intense desire to know if anything had ever been said of herself in connection with the dead.

“No, he was not married, but there was some talk of an affaire du cœur between him and a young English girl, who went off soon after. There’s a bug on your dress, Miss Lyle. Why,”—and, as if it had just occurred to him, Godfrey continued,—“your name is the same as his. It cannot be, though, that you were at all related. He lived up near Alnwick. On our way from Scotland, father and I hunted up his friends, a sister and widowed mother,—poor but honest women, as the biographers say. The mother lives with her daughter, and we gave them a thousand dollars, and the young woman promised to call her little boy after me. The Governor,—that’s father,—did not quite like it, I guess, but I don’t see the harm. Why, I’ve named three different Dutch babies in Hampstead, all the children of Mrs. Peterkin Vandeusenhisen. Two of them are twins,—and I called one Godfrey Schuyler, and the other Schuyler Godfrey,—while the third, which happened to be a girl, was christened Alice Creighton,—that’s a young lady from New York, fathers ward, who is at Hampstead a great deal,—and so proud! You ought to have seen her bit of a pug nose go up when she heard the Dutch baby baptized. Why, she nearly 64jumped out of her skin when Mrs. Van,—as I call her for short,—on being asked for the name, replied: ‘Alice Creighton Vandeusenhisen, if you please.’ The last was a suggestion of my own, by way of making a more striking impression on Alice, because you see, Mrs. Vandeusenhisen had a son,—Peterkin, junior, who was in love with Miss Creighton, and used to send her cakes of maple sugar and sticks of molasses candy he made and pulled himself. You ought to see his hands! The day before the christening I dressed up like a gypsy and deceived the girls and told their fortune, and said Alice would marry a Dutchman, with a long name, like Vandue something. So complete was my disguise that they did not suspect me, and when Alice heard the name at church, Alice Creighton Vandeusenhisen, she started up as if to forbid the banns, and then catching sight of my face she understood it at once, and was so angry, and when we were home from church she cried and said she hated me and would never speak to me again. But she got over it, and last Christmas sent a wax doll with a squawk in its stomach to her namesake.”

Godfrey had wandered very far from the woman on the heather hills who had called Abelard Lyle her son, and though Edith wished to know something more of her she did not venture to question her companion lest he should wonder at her interest in an entire stranger. She had laughed immoderately at his account of the babies named for himself and Miss Alice, and when he finished she said:

“You must be very fond of children, I think.”

“Yes, I am. I’d like a houseful, and when I marry I mean to have enough boys to make a brass band. I told Alice so once, and her nose went higher than it did when she heard the baby’s name. She called me a wretch, and an insulting dog, and said she hated boys, and me most of all. I knew she didn’t, though, because you see,—well, Alice has ten thousand a year, and that will straighten the worst case of turn-up nose in the world. She is an orphan and father is her guardian, and he and mother and Uncle Calvert, that’s my half-uncle and Alice’s, too, put their heads together and thought she’d be a good match 65for me, and it is rather an understood thing that we will marry some time, but I don’t believe we are half as likely to as if they’d said nothing about it. A fellow don’t want his wife picked out and brought to him off-hand as Eve was brought to Adam.”

Here Godfrey paused, and rising from his chair shook down his pants, a habit of his when he was interested or excited, and as his sister Julia said, “had talk on the brain.” He certainly had it now, for Edith was the first one he had found whom he had cared to talk to since leaving the ship, and after two or three shakes he resumed his seat, and told her of himself particularly; how he was going to college the next year, if he was home in time, and after that intended to study law and distinguish himself, if possible.

“Mother was very proud of me, and hoped great things of me,” he said. “I do not wish to disappoint her, for though she is dead, I cannot help thinking that she knows about me just the same, and when I am tempted to yield to what you call the small vices, I always feel her thin white hand on my head where she laid it not long before she died, and said, ‘Be a good and great man, Godfrey, and avoid the first approaches of evil.’ Mother was what they call a fashionable woman, but she was good before she died, and so sure as there is a heaven, so sure she is there, and I’ve never smoked, nor touched a drop of spirits, nor sworn a word since she died, and I never mean to either.”

Godfrey’s voice was low and tender, and his manner subdued when he spoke of his mother, but very different when he touched upon his sisters and ridiculed Julia’s fine lady airs and Emma’s readiness to be stuffed,—his definition for believing everything she heard, even to the most preposterous story. They were at Schuyler Hill now, he said, and Alice was there too, studying with their governess, Miss Browning, who, between the three, was awfully nagged, though she was quite as airy and stuck-up as Alice and Jule, and called him “that dreadful boy!”

“Boy, indeed! and I most eighteen, and standing five feet ten in my socks, to say nothing of this incipient badge of manhood,” 66and he stroked complacently his chin and upper lip where the beginning of a brown beard was visible.

How he rattled on, his fresh young face glowing and lighting up with his excitement, and how intently Edith listened and watched the play of his fine features, and admired his boyish beauty! Surely in him there was nothing but goodness and truth, and as she looked at him she felt glad that his young life was spared, though she could not understand why her husband must have been sacrificed for him. Once in her bitterness she had felt that she hated Godfrey Schuyler, but she did not hate him now, and as she walked slowly with him toward the house, she would have given much to have been as fresh, and frank, and open as he was, instead of living the lie she was living. And to what intent? What good had the deception ever done her? What good could it do her, and why continue it longer? Why not be just what she was, with no concealment hanging over her, and startling her ofttimes with a dread of discovery? Why not tell Godfrey all about herself just as he had told her of himself? Surely, his recent talk with her would warrant such confidence, and why not commence at once a new life by openness and sincerity, even though she lost her place by it?

“I’ll do it and brave my mother, who alone has stood in my way so long,” she thought; and she began: “Mr. Schuyler”—but before she could say more, he interrupted her with:

“Don’t call me that. I’m too much of a boy. Call me Godfrey, please, unless the name is too suggestive of ‘Godfrey’s Cordial,’ in which case say Schuyler, but pray leave off the Mister till my whiskers will at least cast a shadow on the wall. Why, I dare say I shall call you by your first name yet. You cannot be much my senior. How old are you, Miss Lyle?”

It was a question which a little later in life, when more accustomed to the world and its usages, Godfrey would not have asked; but Edith answered unhesitatingly; “I am twenty-seven.”

“Zounds!” said Godfrey. “You don’t look it. I did not imagine you more than twenty. Why, you might almost be my 67mother! No, it will never do to call you Edith. Father’s eyebrows would actually meet in the centre at such audacity on my part; that’s a trick he has of scowling when disagreeably surprised. Notice it sometimes, please. The only wrinkle in his face is that valley between his eyes.”

They were in the hall by this time, and bowing to her voluble acquaintance, Edith passed on to her room, where for half an hour or more she sat thinking of the strange Providence which had brought her so near to her past life, and wondering, too, what the result would be, and if she should tell Godfrey as she had fully intended to do, when he interrupted her with his tide of talk. It did not seem as easy to do it now as it had a little while ago; the good opportunity was gone and might not return.

While thus musing the dressing-bell rang, and turning from the window she began to dress for dinner with more interest than usual. Her salary would not allow a very extensive or expensive wardrobe, even if she had desired it, which she did not. Her taste was simple, and she was one of the few to whom every color and style is becoming. Whatever she wore looked well upon her, and in a little country town she would undoubtedly have set the fashion for all. Selecting now from her wardrobe a soft, fleecy, gray tissue, with trimmings of pale blue, her favorite color, she tied about her throat a bit of rich lace which Mrs. Sinclair had given her, and wore the pretty set of pink coral, also that lady’s gift. It was not often that she curled her hair, but to-day she let two heavy ringlets fall upon her neck, and knew herself how well she was looking, when, at the ringing of the second bell, she descended to the hall where Godfrey was waiting for her. He had thought her very handsome in her morning wrapper and garden hat, and when he saw her now he gave a suppressed kind of whistle, and with as much freedom as if she had been Alice Creighton, or one of his sisters, said to her, “Ain’t you nobby, though!”

It is doubtful if Edith knew just what nobby meant, but she set it down as an Americanism, and knew she was complimented.

“Allow me,” Godfrey said, and offering her his arm, he conducted 68her to the dining-room, where his aunt and father were already assembled.

CHAPTER X.
COLONEL SCHUYLER.

e looked up in some surprise when he saw the couple come in, and the scowl between the eyes, of which Godfrey had spoken, was plainly perceptible.

“My son is getting very familiar with that girl,” was his thought; but he was very polite to Edith, who sat near to him, and during the dinner he occasionally addressed some remark to her, while his eyes wandered often to her face with a questioning look, which brought a bright color to her cheek, and made her wonder if he was thinking of the young girl who had looked at him from among the vine leaves and told him Abelard’s name.

He was not thinking of her; he was only speculating upon the rare beauty of the face beside him, and trying vaguely to recall where he had seen one like it.

“In some picture gallery; a fancy piece, I think,” was his conclusion, as with a growing interest in Edith he resolved to question his sister concerning her at the first opportunity.

As yet he had only talked with Mrs. Sinclair of the past, and all that had come to them both since their last meeting years ago. She had told him of her life and failing health, so apparent to him that, as she talked, he had involuntarily taken her thin hands in his, and wished he had come to her sooner; and then he told her of himself and his children and his wife, who, whatever she might have been while living, had died a good true woman, and gone where neither a Rossiter nor Schuyler is preferred, but only they who have His name upon their foreheads. Of Godfrey he had spoken with all a father’s pride for his only son, saying he hoped that this trip would tone him down somewhat and make him more of a man and less of a wild, teasing 69boy; but of Edith he made no mention. Indeed, he had not given her a thought until he saw her come in on Godfrey’s arm, when there awoke within him a strange kind of interest in her, and an inexplicable feeling that in some way she was to affect him or his. He supposed her much younger than she was, and noticing Godfrey’s evident admiration he inly resolved to leave London very soon and take the lad out of harm’s way, if indeed any harm threatened him from this beautiful woman, who fascinated and attracted him as well.

“Sister,” he said to Mrs. Sinclair, when dinner was over and they were alone together, “who is this Miss Lyle? She has a remarkable face.”

Most women have a hobby, and Mrs. Sinclair’s was Edith, of whom she was never tired of talking. She had liked her from the first, and two years of intimate acquaintance had only increased her fondness for the girl, and for hours she would sit and ring her praises if she could but find a listener. So, now, when her brother said what he did, she began at once:

“Yes, she is a remarkable person every way. She has been with me more than two years, and I like her better every day. Such a face and figure are rarely seen in this country, and her manners would become a royal princess; and yet she is only the daughter of a poor curate, who must have made a foolish marriage with one not his equal. I cannot endure the girl’s mother. I’ve never seen her but once, and then she impressed me very unfavorably, as if she was not real, you know. Edith must be like her father. He is dead, and the mother takes in lodgers.”

“Ah,” and Colonel Schuyler’s voice was indicative of disappointment, but his next question was: “How old is this girl?”

“Twenty-seven, I believe,” was the reply, “though she looks much younger.”

“Yes, she does. I thought her about twenty,” Colonel Schuyler said, and with his fear for Godfrey removed, he arose and joined the young people, who had just come through a side door into the music room.

“Edith,” Mrs. Sinclair called, “play something for my brother.”

70It was Mrs. Sinclair’s right to command, Edith’s business to obey, and without a word of dissent she sat down and played, with Godfrey on one side of her and the colonel on the other, both listening with rapt attention to her fine playing, and both admiring the soft, white hands which managed the keys so skilfully.

“Edith, dear, sing that pathetic little thing,

‘I am sitting alone to-night, darling.’
You can surely manage that, it is written so low,” Mrs. Sinclair said: and rising from the couch where she had been reclining, she came into the music room, and explained to her brother: “Her voice is not strong and cannot reach the higher notes. She had a great fright when she was quite young, wasn’t it, Edith?”

“Yes,” Edith answered faintly, as she felt the iron hand closing around her throat and shutting down all power to sing even the lowest note.

“I don’t like sitting alone at night, darling. I’d rather have somebody with me, so give us your jolliest piece,” Godfrey said, making Edith laugh in spite of herself, and lifting the invisible hand, so that her voice came back again; and, at Mrs. Sinclair’s second request, she sang:

“I am sitting alone to-night, darling,
Alone in the dear old room;
And the sound of the rain,
As it falls on the pane,
Makes darker the gathering gloom.
“For I know that it falls on a grave, darling,
A grave ’neath the evergreen shade,
Where I laid you away,
One bright autumn day,
When the flowers were beginning to fade.”
Oh, how soft and low and sweet was the voice which sang the song of which Abelard Lyle had been so fond, and there was almost a tear in Godfrey’s eye, and the colonel was beginning 71to look very grave, when the white hands suddenly stopped and fell with a crash among the keys, while Edith gasped, “I can’t finish it; the iron fingers are on my throat, just as they were that dreadful day.”

She evidently did not quite know what she was saying, and her face was deathly pale.

“You are sick, Miss Lyle; come into the air!” Colonel Schuyler said, and leading her out upon the veranda, he made her sit down, while Mrs. Sinclair brought her smelling salts, and Godfrey hovered about disconsolately, remembering the scene in the summer-house, and wondering if she had such spells often. And, having knocked his head against his father’s, when they both stooped to pick up Edith’s handkerchief, he concluded he was de trop, and walked away, saying to himself: “I do believe he is hit real hard. Wouldn’t it be fun to call that regal creature mother!”

He laughed aloud at the idea, but did not think it would be fun, and did not quite believe in his father’s being “hit,” either; but when half an hour later he returned and found the Colonel still sitting by Edith, who had recovered herself, and was talking with a good deal of animation, he felt irritated and impatient, and went off to his room and wrote in his “Impressions of Europe,” a kind of journal he was keeping of his tour, and which he meant to show “the girls,” by way of proving that one American could go abroad and not indorse everything he saw, and make a fool of himself generally. His entry that night was in part as follows:

“Oakwood is a fine old place, with an extensive park, a smoke-house, fine stables, a dog-kennel, and seven servants, to take care of two unprotected females. Edith Lyle, aged 27, is the handsomest woman I ever saw, even in America. Her features are perfect, especially her nose, which might have been the model for the Greek Slave. Not a bit of a pug, and her eyes are large and soft and liquid, as those of the ox-eyed Juno (I like that classical allusion; it shows reading), while her ears are the tiniest I ever saw,—just like little pink sea-shells,—and her splendid brown hair, with a shade or two of yellow sunshine 72in it, rippling back from her smooth white brow, just exactly curly enough, and natural, too, I’ll be bound. She don’t put it up in crimps, not she. Why, what a scarecrow Alice Creighton was, though, that time I caught her with those two forks hanging down about her eyes, with a kind of clamp or horse-shoe on them. I like people natural, as I am sure Edith is. I wonder what makes her go off into a kind of white faint all of a sudden. She did it twice to-day, and I would not wonder if she was given to fits. The governor is hit, sure. I never knew him seem as much interested in any one before. The idea of his leading her into the air and then holding those salts to her nose till he strangled her,—bah!”

And, while Godfrey wrote thus in his journal, his father sat talking to Edith, and wondering to find how much she knew and how sensibly she expressed herself. Colonel Schuyler was not a man of many words, and seldom talked much to any one, but there was something about Edith which interested him greatly, and he sat by her until the twilight began to close around them, and his sister came to warn him against taking cold and exposing Edith, too. Then he went into the house, and, without exactly knowing it, felt a little disappointed when she left the room and did not come again.

Colonel Schuyler kept a journal, too, in which he occasionally jotted down the incidents of the day; and that night, after recounting his arrival at Oakwood and his grief at finding his sister so great an invalid, he added:

“She is exceedingly fortunate in having secured a most admirable person for her companion. Besides being educated, and refined, and beautiful, Miss Lyle impresses me as a remarkable woman. Yes, as a very remarkable woman.”

The next night Godfrey recorded:

“There is nothing quite so foolish as an old man in love! I wonder if he thinks she can care for him!—and yet he blushed to-day when I found him turning the leaves of her music and listening to her singing. I never knew him listen two minutes to Alice and Jule,—and no wonder, such operatic screeches as they make when Professor La Farge is there, and the boys in 73the street stop and mock them. Edith’s voice is the sweetest I ever heard, and so sad that it makes a chap feel for his bandanna. Why, even father told auntie that her singing made him think of poor Emily, meaning my mother! It is a bad sign when a live woman like Edith Lyle makes a man think of his dead wife. I wonder what she thinks of him! She looks as unconcerned as a block of marble; but you can’t tell what is in a woman’s mind, and widowers are awful. Why, there have been forty women after father already; but I must say he has behaved admirably thus far, and never spoken to a bonnet outside our own family, unless it were to Miss Esther Armstrong, and that is nothing. She is the Hampstead school-ma’am, and has thrashed me more than twenty times.”

In Colonel Schuyler’s journal the record was as follows:

“I wonder if my dear Emily knows how much Miss Lyle’s singing makes me think of her and her grave under the evergreen, where we did

‘Lay her away, one bright autumn day,
When the flowers were beginning to fade.’
Miss Lyle has a singularly sweet, plaintive voice, and it affects me strangely, for I did not know I cared for music. Emily never sang, and the young ladies at home make very singular sounds sometimes. It is strange about her losing her voice, or rather her power to reach the higher notes. It must have been a fearful shock of some kind, and she evidently does not like to talk of it; for, when I questioned her a little and advised her seeing a physician, she seemed disturbed and agitated, and even distressed. Dr. Malcolm at Hampstead would know just what to do for her, and she ought to have medical advice, for she has a remarkable voice,—a very remarkable voice.”

When Colonel Schuyler liked a thing, it was remarkable, and when he liked it very much, it was very remarkable; so, when he wrote what he did of Edith and her voice, he had passed upon her his highest encomium.

Four weeks went by, and he still lingered at Oakwood, and on the last day of the fourth week wrote again:

74“I fully expected to have been in France before this time, but have stayed on for what reason I hardly know. It is very pleasant here, and my sister’s health is such that I dislike to leave her so soon, even though I leave her in excellent hands. Miss Edith is certainly a very remarkable person, and I am more interested in her than I have been in any one since I first met my dear Emily.”

Here the colonel paused, and laying down his pen went back in thought to the time when he was young and first met Emily Rossiter, the proud, pale, light-haired girl, whose two hundred thousand in prospect had made her a belle in society, and little as he liked to own it now that the daisies were growing above her, had commended her to his consideration. His courtship was short, and wholly void of passion or ecstasy. She knew he was a suitable match and she wished to go abroad, and accepted him readily enough, and they were married without so much as a kiss exchanged between them. He had so far unbent from his cold dignity as to hold her hand in his own while he asked her to be his wife, but as soon as her promise was given he put it back in her lap very respectfully, and said, “That hand is now mine,” and that was the nearest approach to love-making which he reached with Emily. After marriage he was scarcely more demonstrative, though always kind and considerate, and when at her father’s death it was found that her fortune was one hundred thousand instead of two, he kept it to himself if he felt any chagrin, and never in a single instance checked her extravagance, but suffered her in everything to have her way. At the last, however, when she stood face to face with death, and her life with him lay all behind, there came a change, and he could yet feel the passionate kiss which the white lips pressed upon his as they called him “dear husband.”

“Poor Emily,” he said, aloud; “we were very happy together.”

Just then, upon the terrace below there was the sound of a clear, sweet voice, which thrilled him as Emily’s never had, and Edith looked up to the windows of the room adjoining his, 75where Godfrey was calling to her. It was a beautiful face, and as he watched her gliding away among the shrubbery he thought how she would brighten and adorn his house at Schuyler Hill, and how proud he should be of her when his money had arrayed her in the apparel befitting his wife. Every barrier of pride and prejudice and early training had gone down before Edith Lyle’s wonderful beauty, and the proud, haughty man was ready to offer her his name and hand on one condition. Her mother could not go with her, and in taking him she must give up her family friends, if indeed she had any besides the mother. He knew nothing against Mrs. Barrett, but his sister disliked her, and that was enough, if he ignored, as he tried to think he did, the fact that she took in lodgers and sewing. Many highly respectable ladies did that, he knew, but he had a feeling that Edith’s mother was not highly respectable, and he doubted if she was a lady even. His sister, when questioned with regard to Edith’s family, had reported the mother as a pushing, curious, disagreeable woman, who assumed to be what she certainly was not.

“Edith is not like her in the least, and must inherit her natural refinement and delicacy from her father,” Mrs. Sinclair had said, and the colonel was satisfied if one side of the house was comme il faut.

As a Schuyler he could afford to stoop a little, and he felt that it was stooping to marry his sister’s hired companion. As far as position was concerned, he might as well take poor, plain Ettie Armstrong, the village schoolmistress, who in point of family was undoubtedly Edith’s equal. There was, however, this difference. The people at home could know nothing of Edith’s antecedents, save that she was an English girl and the daughter of a curate; while another fact, which outweighed all else, was her exceeding great beauty and queenly style, which, with proper surroundings and influence, would place her on the highest wave of society. And he was ready to give her the surroundings and the influence, and felt a thrill of exultant pride as he saw her in fancy at the head of his table and moving through his handsome rooms, herself the handsomest appendage there.

76“I may as well settle it at once,” he thought, and the next day he found his opportunity and took it, with what success the reader will learn from a page in Edith’s diary.

CHAPTER XI.
EDITH’S DIARY.
Oakwood, July 15th, 18—.

m I dreaming, or is it a reality that Col. Schuyler has asked me to be his wife? He says he thinks I am more beautiful than any woman he has ever seen, and that I would make such a rare gem for his house at Hampstead, and he would surround me with every possible luxury. And in his voice, usually so cold and calm and impassioned, there was a little trembling, and his forehead flushed as he went on to state the one condition on which he would do me this honor:

“My mother must have no part in my grandeur! She must remain here. If necessary, money should be freely given for her needs, but she could not live with me!”

Poor mother, with all her planning and her dreams of my brilliant future she never once thought that when the chance came she would be left out and have neither part nor lot in the question! What would she say if she knew it, and what will she say when I tell her I refused him? For I did, and told him it could never be. For a moment, though, weak woman that I am, I was tempted to end this life of dependence and poverty, and take what he offered me; not his love: he never hinted at such an emotion, and I think that feeling is rare in such natures as his. I doubt if he felt it for the Lady Emily, whom he married in his May time, and surely now in his October he has no place for foolishness of that kind. He does not love me, but he admires my face and form, and would no doubt be very kind and careful of me, just as he would be kind to and careful of a 77favorite horse whose looks depended on such treatment. He would hang upon me jewels rare, with silks and laces and satins, and I could wear them and feel my heart break afresh each time I looked from my window across the lawn to that grave under the evergreen where Abelard is lying. I should hear him discussed, and with Colonel Schuyler stand by the mound and listen to a story I know so well, and loathe myself for the lie I was acting, for if I was there as Colonel Schuyler’s wife, my life would be one tissue of falsehood and deceit. He, of all men in the world, would not take me if he knew the truth, and during that interval when I hesitated I had resolved not to tell him! I would go to him, if I went at all, as Edith Lyle the maiden, and not Edith Lyle the widow. But only for an instant, thank Heaven, did the tempter have me in his control ere I cast him behind me with the resolve that whatever else I might do, I would be frank with the man whom I made up my mind to marry, and as I had not made up my mind to marry Colonel Schuyler, I did not tell him who I was. I only declined his offer, and said it could not be, and when his remark that I did not know what I was doing angered me, I burst out impetuously:

“I do know what I am doing. I am refusing a match which the world,—your world, would say was far above me; but, Colonel Schuyler, poor as I am, and humble in position, I am rich in the feeling which will not let me sell myself for a name and a home. And if I accepted you it would be only for that. I respect you. I believe you to be sincere in your offer, and that you would try to make me happy, but you could not do it unless I loved you, and I do not; besides——”

Here he stopped me, and took both my hands in his, and seemed almost tender and lovable as he said

“Edith, I did not suppose you could love me so soon, but I hoped you might grow to it when you found how proud I was of you, and how I would try to make you happy.”

“Colonel Schuyler,” I interrupted him, “you have talked of your pride in me, and your admiration of me, but you have said nothing of love. Answer me now, please. Do you love me?”

78He wanted to say yes, I know, for his chin quivered, and there was in his face the look of one fighting with some principle hard to be overcome. In his case it was the principle of truth and right, and it conquered every other feeling, and compelled him to answer:

“Perhaps not as you in your youth count love. Our acquaintance has been too short for that; but I can and I will; only give me a chance. Don’t decide now. I will not take it as a decision if you do. Wait till my return from the Continent, and then tell me what you will do. I had hoped to take you with me, and thought that the glories of Rome, seen by me twice before, would gain new interest with your eyes beside me. But my sister needs you; stay with her during my absence, and try to like me a little, and when I come back I know I can say to you, ‘Edith Lyle, I love you.’”

I was touched and softened by his manner quite as much as by what he said, and I replied to him, gently:

“Even then my answer must be the same. My love was buried years ago. I have a story to tell you of the past.”

Again those dreadful fingers clutched my throat as I tried to tell him of Abelard, and my dead baby, buried I knew not where. My voice was gone, and my face, which was deadly pale, frightened him I know, for he led me to the window and pushed my hair from my brow and said to me:

“Edith, please do not distress yourself with any tale of the past. You say you have loved and lost that love, and let that suffice. I suspected something of the kind, but you are not less desirable to me. I have loved and lost, and in that respect we are even; so let nothing in the past deter you from giving me the answer I so much desire when I return to Oakwood. Godfrey is coming this way. I hear his whistle; so good-night, and Heaven bless you, Edith.”

He pressed my hand and left the room just as Godfrey entered the door in another direction, singing softly when he saw me:

“She sat by the door one cold afternoon,
To hear the wind blow and look at the moon;
So pensive was Edith, my dear, darling Edith.”
79He did not get any farther, for something in his light badinage jarred upon my feelings just then, and assuming a severe dignity, I said:

“You mistake the name. I am not Edith. I am Miss Lyle.”

He looked surprised an instant, and then, with a comical smile and a shaking down of his pants, he said:

“I beg your pardon, Miss Lyle. I meant Kathleen O’Moore, of course, but seeing you at the moment I made a mistake in the name, and no wonder, dazed as I am with a letter just received from Alice, who hopes I shall return from my foreign travel greatly improved in mind, and taste, and manners, as if the latter could be improved. She sent her picture too. Would you like to see it?”

He passed me the carte-de-visite, and I saw the likeness of a girl who he said was only sixteen, but whom I should have taken for twenty, at least, judging from the dress and the expression of the face, which I did not like. It was too supercilious, if not insolent, to suit me, while the turned-up nose added to the look. And still there was a style about her which marked her as what is called a “high-bred city girl,” and I have no doubt she will eventually become a belle, with her immense fortune and proud, arrogant demeanor.

“What do you think of it?” Godfrey asked; and feeling sure that with regard to her his feelings could not be wounded, I answered:

“I do not quite like her expression, and she looks too old for you.”

“Good! I’ll tell her that some time when she is nagging me unmercifully,” Godfrey said, adding: “I had a letter from Jule too, with her photograph, and also one of our house and grounds. This is Julia.”

It was the face of a brunette, dark, handsome, but proud and imperious, and I was glad that she was not to be my step-daughter.

“Jule is handsome, except her ears, which are as big as a palm-leaf fan,” Godfrey said, and I replied:

80“Yes, she is handsome, and will make a brilliant woman.”

“This is our home,” he continued, and he put into my hand a large photograph of the house on Schuyler Hill, and a considerable portion of the grounds.

There were the tops of the evergreens, and there was a white stone shining through the green, and I said to Godfrey,

“Whose monument is that?”

“That? Let me see. Why, that is young Lyle’s, the man who saved my life. You remember I told you about him? Mother’s is farther on and out of sight.”

How faint and sick I felt to have Abelard’s grave thus brought near to me, and there was a blur before my eyes, which, for a moment, prevented me from seeing distinctly. Then it cleared away, and I was able to examine the picture and see how the grounds had been improved since that morning when Abelard’s blood was on the grass where now the flowers were growing. It was a fine place, and as I looked at it and thought it had been offered me, ay, might yet be mine, if I would take it, did I feel any regret for having refused it? None whatever. If I were to tell Col. Schuyler everything I should never go there, and if I were to go without telling him my life would be one of wretchedness and hatred of myself. No, better bear with poverty and servitude than live a greater lie than I am living now. So I gave the picture back to Godfrey, and bidding him good-night, came up to my room, where I could be alone, to think over the events of that eventful day.

EXTRACT FROM GODFREY’S JOURNAL.
“What a regal creature Edith is! and I do believe father thinks so too, but that would be an awful match for her. Jule would scratch her eyes out, and if ever I should marry Alice, which I never shall, but if I do, and bring her home to Schuyler Hill, wouldn’t I have lively times between step-mother and wife; but that is too absurd to consider for a moment. I wish she was younger or that I was older. Let me see,—’most eighteen from ’most twenty-eight, leaves ten. No, that will 81never do. A man may not marry his grandmother, much less a boy, as Jule calls me in her letter, giving me all sorts of advice, and hoping I will overcome that habit of wriggling,—meaning the way I have of shaking down my pants. As if I knew when I did it. Alice’s letter was a very good one, only why need she call me “Dear Godfrey” when I’m not her Dear Godfrey, and never shall be. Why, she looks older than Miss Lyle herself in that picture, with her hair stuck on the top of her head like a heathen Chinee. I believe I’ll tear the picture up. Miss Lyle did not like it, neither do I, and I will not have it in my possession. I wonder if Miss Lyle would give me hers. I mean to ask her to-morrow.”

He did ask her and received no for his answer, and then tore up Alice’s photograph, and packed his valise, and with his father set off for Paris the following day.

CHAPTER XII.
EDITH AND HER MOTHER.

“nd you refused him?”

“Yes, mother, I refused him.”

“Are you crazy, child?”

“Not as crazy as I should be to accept him.”

Edith was sitting with her mother in the little house in Caledonia Street, when the above conversation took place. It was the day of Col. Schuyler’s departure for Paris, and she had driven into town, with permission to stay to tea if she liked. She had not intended to tell her mother what had been said to her by the colonel, but when questioned of him something in her manner excited Mrs. Barrett’s suspicion, and in her usual forcible way she wrung from her daughter the fact that Schuyler Hill had been offered to her and refused. To say that Mrs. Barrett was angry would feebly express her emotions. In all her dreams for Edith she had never hoped for anything quite equal to an alliance with Col. Schuyler, and now that she had 82wilfully thrown the chance away she was exceedingly indignant, and expressed her disapprobation in terms so harsh and bitter that Edith, who seldom felt equal to a contest with her mother’s fierce, strong will, roused herself at last and answered back:

“Mother, you have said enough, and you must stop now and listen to me. You upbraid me for having thrown away the chance for which you have waited so long, and to which you say you have shaped every act of your life since I was born, and you accuse me of ingratitude when you have done so much for me. Mother, for all the real good you have done me I am grateful, and you know how gladly I will work for you so long as I have health and strength to do so, but for the secrecy you have imposed upon me with regard to my past life I do not thank you, and could I go backward a few years, or had my baby lived, I would have no concealments from the world. To me it is no shame that I was once the wife of Abelard Lyle; the shame is that I try to hide it, and when Colonel Schuyler asked me to be his, the truth sprang to my lips at once, and but for that terrible choking sensation which came upon me when you took baby away, I should have told him all.”

“And ruined your prospects forever,” Mrs. Barrett said, angrily.

“Yes, ruined them forever so far as Col. Schuyler is concerned, but that would have mattered little,” Edith answered, proudly. “I have no love for him; he has none for me. I asked him the question, and he could not tell me yes. His fancy was caught, and he talked of my beauty, and grace, and voice, and culture, and hinted that I was a fitting picture for his handsome home in Hampstead. You saw Lady Emily once. You remember how pale, and sallow, and thin she was. Neither gems nor rich gay clothing could make her fair to look upon, and I have no doubt her husband would be prouder of me than he ever was of her, with all her money and Rossiter blood, that is, if he took me as Edith Lyle, the daughter of an English curate, and nothing more; but once let him know the truth, as he assuredly must have known it if I had for a moment considered his proposition,—and think you he would not have 83spurned with contempt the widow of a carpenter, and that carpenter his own hired workman?”

“Not if he truly loved you,” Mrs. Barrett interposed; and Edith answered impetuously:

“But I tell you he does not love me. He only cares for my personal attractions,—he would like to show me off as his young English bride, whose family must be ignored, for, mother, he told me that distinctly; he said he knew nothing of my friends, and did not care to know, as he wished for me alone; that if I married him, you must stay behind,—a mother-in-law always made more or less trouble, and he preferred to have you remain where you are, and if money was needed for your support, it should always be forthcoming in sufficient amount for every comfort.”

“And yet he knows nothing of me to dislike,” Mrs. Barrett faltered, her countenance falling, and her eyes having in them a look of disappointment.

That she was to be set aside and have no part in Edith’s grandeur, had never occurred to her, and in fancy she had already crossed the sea and was luxuriously domesticated at Schuyler Hill, as the mother of the mistress and general superintendent of everything, with plenty of money at her command, and herself looked up to and envied by the very people who had once treated her slightingly, and who would never suspect of having known her as Mrs. Fordham. She looked much older now than she had eleven years ago, and her hair was white as snow, while the deep black she wore constantly was a still more complete disguise. So there was no danger of detection,—no link to connect her with the cottage by the bridge where she once lived, or that grave under the evergreen. But all this was of no avail. Col. Schuyler would not have her on any terms, and knowing this she was the more easily reconciled to Edith’s decision, until by dint of questioning she learned that the colonel did not consider the matter settled, but would urge his suit again on his return to England. Then her old ambition revived, and with a mother’s forgetfulness of self, she thought, “She shall accept him then. I will see her a lady even if I starve in a garret.”

84But she wisely resolved to say no more upon the subject at present, and Edith had arisen to go, when down the stairs came the patter of little feet, and a sweet, childish voice was heard warbling a simple Scottish ballad, and Edith caught a gleam of bright auburn hair falling under a white cape bonnet, as a young girl went past the window and out upon the walk.

“Whose child is that? Has Mrs. Rogers come?” she asked, and Mrs. Barrett answered:

“She has been here nearly two weeks, and that is little Gertie Westbrooke.”

CHAPTER XIII.
MRS. BARRETT’S LODGERS.

rs. Rogers had received a message from her cousin Norah, which sent her again to Caledonia Street, where she found Mrs. Barrett more civil than before, and more inclined to let her rooms. Some little hesitancy there was, it is true, with regard to the chamber which had been Edith’s, and where she now occasionally spent a night.

“Surely your daughter can sleep with you, and does not require an extra room,” Mrs. Barrett said; and Mrs. Rogers replied:

“I prefer that she should have a room to herself. As I told you before, she is not my child, and I am more particular on that account to bring her up different. She has as good blood in her veins as many a would-be fine lady.”

So Mrs. Barrett gave up the point and prepared Edith’s old room for little Gertie, to whom Mary was as devoted as if she had been a scion of nobility. If Mrs. Barrett had cared for children she would have been interested in Gertie at once, but as it was she did not notice her particularly till she had been for several days an inmate of the house. Then one afternoon, as she sat at her sewing, her ear caught the sound of a sweet voice singing a familiar air. Something in the tone of the voice arrested 85her attention, and carried her back to the time when Edith was young and sang that very song. Moving her chair so that she could command a better view of the back porch where Gertie sat, she noticed for the first time how very pretty she was. She was rather small for her age, and had a round, sweet face, with a complexion like wax, and the clearest, sunniest blue eyes, which seemed fairly to dance when she was pleased, and again were so dreamy and indescribably sad in their expression as if the remembrance of some great sorrow had left its shadows in them. The long, thick eyelashes, and heavy arched brows gave them the appearance of being much darker than they really were, and when the lids were raised one was surprised to find them just the color of the summer sky on a clear, balmy day. But Gertie’s hair was her greatest point of beauty, her bright, wavy hair which in her babyhood must have been almost red, but which now was auburn, with a shading of gold in it. Taken altogether, she was a very beautiful child, and one whom strangers always noticed and commented upon, and even Mrs. Barrett, as she sat watching her, felt a sudden throb of interest in her, and thought of another little one, who might have called her grandma and made her old age happy.

“Gertie,” she said, after a moment, “come here, please. I want to talk with you.”

Startled by the voice and a little surprised to be addressed by the cold, quiet woman who had never before evinced the slightest interest in her or scarcely spoken to her, Gertie arose, and coming timidly to Mrs. Barrett’s side, stood waiting for her to speak.

“Gertie,” Mrs. Barrett began, “have you always lived in London?”

“Yes, ma’am, but not with auntie,” was Gertie’s reply: and Mrs. Barrett continued: “With whom then did you live?”

“With my mamma, who died when I was two years old,” was the prompt answer; and Mrs. Barrett went on: “Had you no father then?”

“Why, yes, but—but——;” the child hesitated a little and blushed painfully, then added, “he didn’t like me much, I 86guess, and when the new mother came, it was very bad, and so auntie, who isn’t my auntie, you know, only she lived there and liked me, took me for her own little girl, and I’ve been so happy with her, though mamma’s house was much bigger and nicer than any we have had since, and there were servants there just as there are at Oakwood, only not so many. But I like living with auntie best.”

Mrs. Barrett was interested now, and was about to question the child further of that home like Oakwood, when Mrs. Rogers appeared and called the little girl away. That afternoon Mrs. Barrett was attacked with a nervous headache which was so severe as to send her to her bed, where she lay with her eyes closed and moaning occasionally, when a light footstep crossed the floor, and a low, sweet voice said: “You are real sick, aren’t you? May I do something for you?” and before Mrs. Barrett could speak, two soft hands were pressed upon her aching head, which they rubbed and caressed until the throbbing ceased entirely, and the pain was less hard to bear. Gertie was a natural nurse, and she smoothed the lady’s pillow, and folded up a shawl and put it away and adjusted the shutters to exclude the light and still admit the air, and did it all so quietly and noiselessly that Mrs. Barrett would hardly have known she was there.

“You are very kind,” she said, “and I thank you so much, but don’t trouble yourself anymore. I shall do very well now.”

“Oh, I like to take care of you,” Gertie answered. “It’s funny I know, but you see I make believe I am caring for my grandma. I have one somewhere, auntie says, although I never saw her, and I guess she don’t like me very well.”

“Not like you!” Mrs. Barrett exclaimed. “How can she help it?”

“You see she don’t know me,” Gertie answered. “If she did, maybe she would. Do you like me?”

The question was put timidly, and the little face was very grave until the answer came, “Yes, very much;” then it flushed all over, and the blue eyes shone like stars while the warm red lips touched Mrs. Barrett’s cheek so lovingly, as Gertie 87exclaimed: “I am so glad. I want to be liked. I want everybody to like me.”

A desire to be loved was a part of Gertie’s nature, and with it she seemed to possess the faculty of making everybody love her, even to Mrs. Barrett, who, after that day, was exceedingly kind to the little girl, and ceased to care because she was an occupant of Edith’s room. That there was some history connected with her she was sure, but no questioning on her part availed to elicit any more information than had been volunteered during their first interview. Mrs. Rogers must have cautioned Gertie not to talk of her parents and old home, for she was very reticent, and answered evasively whenever Mrs. Barrett broached the subject to her, as she did once or twice.

“Auntie can tell you,” was her reply, when asked where her father had lived, and as Mrs. Barrett did not care to talk to Mrs. Rogers, she knew nothing definite of little Gertie Westbrooke when Edith came to see her and brought news of her rejection of the colonel.

CHAPTER XIV.
COLONEL SCHUYLER RETURNS.
“Oakwood, May 25th, 18—.

olonel Schuyler:—Your sister, Mrs. Sinclair, is lying very low, and desires to see you as soon as possible.

“Respectfully, Edith Lyle.”
This short epistle found Col. Schuyler in Florence, and brought him back to England at once. During the winter and the early spring Mrs. Sinclair had been failing, and when May came, the change in her for the worse was so perceptible that she asked Edith to write for her brother, whom she wished to see once more. To Edith the thought of losing her kind mistress was terrible, for, aside from the genuine love she bore the 88lady, she knew that losing her involved also the loss of the home where she had been so happy, and she dreaded to encounter the curious suspicions she would have to meet alone and unprotected.

“What will you do when I am gone?” Mrs. Sinclair said to her one day when speaking of her approaching decease, and as Edith made no reply, except to cover her face with her fingers, through which the tears trickled slowly, she went on: “You seem to me like a daughter, and I shrink from the thought of leaving you alone. If it were possible I would make you independent, but at my death the Oakwood property reverts to a nephew of my husband’s, and I cannot control it. I can, however, do something for you, and will. Edith, I have never mentioned the subject to you before,—but, was there not,—did not my brother offer himself to you last summer when he was here?”

“Yes,” came faintly from Edith; and Mrs. Sinclair continued:

“And you refused him, subject, I believe, to a reconsideration?”

“I refused him, and with no thought of reconsideration on my part. My decision was final,” Edith said; and Mrs. Sinclair continued:

“It is not for me to dictate in such matters, perhaps, but it seems to me you will do well to think of it again should he renew the matter on his return. It is an offer which any woman should consider seriously before rejecting it. I know he can make you happy, and you would far better be his honored wife even if he is many years your senior, than be cast upon the world with your face and manner as a lure to evil-minded men, who hold a governess as only fair spoil.”

“I know it; I know all that, and feel it so keenly,” Edith answered, and for an instant there came over her such a feeling of utter loneliness and desolation, and such a shrinking from the future which might be to her what the past had been until she knew Mrs. Sinclair, that she would almost have taken Colonel Schuyler had he been there then.

89Smothering her sobs and commanding her voice as well as she could, she continued:

“I would rather die than meet again what I have met in the families where I was employed before I knew you, but mother is poor and growing old, and I must do something.”

“Why not take the home offered you?” Mrs. Sinclair asked, while Edith sat motionless as a stone, her face as white as ashes, and that horrid sensation in her throat which kept her from uttering a word.

When at last she could speak she astonished Mrs. Sinclair by falling on her knees beside the bed, and crying out:

“Oh, Mrs. Sinclair, you do not know, you cannot guess what and who I am, or you would know that could never be. Forgive me, I have been an impostor all these years, but now I must speak and tell the whole, and then you shall judge if your proud brother, knowing all, would take me for his bride.”

Twenty minutes passed, and then Edith sat, paler and more motionless, if possible, than before, her hands pressed tightly together, and her eyes cast down as if afraid to meet the wondering gaze fixed upon her. She had withheld nothing, and Mrs. Sinclair knew the entire story, from the hasty marriage in New York, up to the day when the message came that the little baby was dead. She had been astonished and shocked, and indignant with the mother rather than with the daughter, who, she readily saw, had been only a tool in an ambitious, heartless woman’s hands, and whom she could forgive for a deception which had wronged no one and in which no one but herself was as yet involved. So, when at last she spoke, her voice was just as kind and gentle as of old, as she said:

“My poor child, yours is a strange experience for one so young. Truth is always best, and it would have been just as well if it had been confessed at first. I am glad you have told me; and if my brother asks you again, as I think he will, you must tell him. It may make a difference with him. I do not know. Certainly it would, if withheld till after marriage. That deception he would hardly forgive. Leave me now, please; I 90am very tired, and you, too, need the open air after your great excitement.”

The next day Col. Schuyler came alone, as Godfrey was in Russia. But Mrs. Sinclair was too weak to talk much, and could only look her pleasure at her brothers presence. Three days after she died, with her head on Col. Schuyler’s bosom and Edith kneeling at her side. Just at the last she had taken the girl’s hand, and putting it in that of her brother had whispered:

“Take care of her, Howard. She is worthy, and has been like a daughter to me.”

“I will,” he answered, emphatically, as his hand closed tightly over that of Edith, who felt as if that hand-clasp bound her to the fate which she had no longer power to resist.

Immediately after the funeral she returned to her mother’s cottage, but before she went Col. Schuyler asked for a private interview, which she granted with a feeling that it was of no use to struggle against what was inevitable. Col. Schuyler had tried to forget her during his travels; had tried to reason with himself that a poor unknown girl, who was his sister’s hired companion, was not a fitting match for a Schuyler whose first wife had been a Rossiter. But one thought of the beautiful face, and of the sweet voice which had sung to him in the twilight was sufficient to break down every barrier of pride and make him willing to sacrifice a great deal for the sake of securing her. And so it was that on his return to England he was resolved to renew the offer once made and rejected, and to take no refusal this time. His sister approved his choice, and had sanctioned it with her dying breath, and thus reassured he went to Edith with a feeling of security as to the result of the interview, which manifested itself somewhat in his manner, and made Edith feel more and more how helpless she was, and how certain it was that her secret must be told.

“Edith,” he began in his stiff way, as he took a seat beside her, “just before I left Oakwood last August, I held a conversation with you which I know you have not forgotten. I asked you to be my wife, and you asked me if I loved you. I 91could not say yes, then, for though I admired and respected, and wanted you, I did not experience any of those ecstatic thrills of which we read in books, and which very young people call love. And even now,”—he paused a moment and hesitated, and a flush spread itself over his face, “even now I may not feel as a younger man would in similar circumstances; but when I tell you that you have scarcely been out of my mind for a moment during my absence, that I have dreamed of you night and day, and that in all the world there is nothing I desire so much as I desire you, I think you will be satisfied that if I do not love you as you have imagined you might be loved, I am in a fair way to do so, if I receive a little encouragement.”

He paused, but Edith did not speak, and sat before him with her long eyelashes cast down and her hands working nervously together. She knew he was sincere, though his wooing was so different from what Abelard’s had been, or what Godfrey’s would be were he in his father’s place. But Godfrey was young, and Abelard had been young, too, and both were different from this cold, proud man of forty, who had unbent his dignity so much, and who seemed so earnest, and even tender as he went on to tell her of all she had to gain if she would go with him to the home he would make more beautiful than it already was, for her sake. It was a very pleasant picture he drew of the future, but it did not move Edith one whit, because she felt certain that this life could not be hers if she told him all, as she must surely tell him, if he persisted in his suit. She admitted to him that he was not disagreeable to her; that she found his society pleasant; that she believed him to be a man of honor, who would try to make her happy; and when he asked why she hesitated, she opened her lips to tell him, but could not speak the words.

“I can write them better,” she thought, and when she could command her voice, she said to him: “Give me a few days, a week, in which to think, and then I will write you my decision. I know you honor me, and I thank you for it, and believe you sincere, and for that reason, would not for the world deceive 92you. I have something to tell you which I can better put on paper. Let me go now, for I feel like suffocating.”

She spoke slowly and with difficulty, and her face was so white, that Col. Schuyler felt alarmed lest she should faint, and passing his arm around her, led her to the balcony and brought her a glass of water, and laid his hand softly on her hair, and seemed so kind and thoughtful, that for the first time there awoke in Edith’s heart a throb of something like affection for this man who might make her so happy.

“Oh, if I only could forget the past and accept the life offered me,” she thought, as an hour later he put her into the carriage which was to take her to her mother’s, and then pressing her hand deferentially, said to her: “I shall await your answer with a great deal of impatience, and shall not consent to receive an unfavorable one.”

He lifted his hat, and the carriage drove away to Caledonia Street, where her mother was expecting her.

CHAPTER XV.
EDITH’S ANSWER.

ertie Westbrooke had gone to the country with Mrs. Rogers for a few weeks, and Edith occupied her old room, and slept in the child’s bed, and dreamed strange things which haunted her waking hours, and sent her heart back to the little one lost long ago with a yearning such as she had not felt in years. And with this pain, this sense of loss still clinging to her, she sat down one morning and wrote the story of her life, word for word, keeping nothing back and finishing by saying:

“If, after knowing all this, you still wish me to be your wife, I will not refuse, but will do my duty faithfully, so help me Heaven!”

She showed the letter to her mother, who, finding that it was 93useless to oppose her daughter, offered to take it to Oakwood herself.

“Better so than to trust it to the post,” she said. “Besides, it is well for me to be there to answer any questions he may ask, and to take the blame wholly upon myself, as I deserve.”

Edith did not refuse. She was rather glad than otherwise to have her mother go as a kind of mediator between herself and the man whom she began to find it would be a little hard to lose. Accordingly Mrs. Barrett arrayed herself in her deepest mourning, and with her thick veil drawn over her face, started for Oakwood and asked for Colonel Schuyler. He had passed the four days drearily enough, and in his impatience had more than once resolved to go to Caledonia Street, and claim Edith’s answer. But he had promised her not to do so, and he remained at Oakwood in a state of great suspense, until the day when a lady was announced as wishing to see him.

“It surely cannot be Edith,” he thought, as he started for the parlor, where the closely-veiled figure arose and introduced itself as “Mrs. Dr. Barrett, mother of Miss Lyle.”

Colonel Schuyler was one of the preoccupied kind of men who take little note of what does not directly concern them, and though he must have heard the name of Edith’s mother, he had paid no attention to it, or thought strange that it was not Lyle. Now, however, he noticed it, and with only a stiff bow to the lady said:

“Barrett? Mrs. Barrett? And you Miss Lyle’s mother? How is that?”

“I have been twice married, and my last husband was Dr. Barrett,” was the reply, which satisfied the colonel, who took a seat at some distance from his visitor and waited for her to communicate her business.

Evidently it was a little awkward for her to do so, for she hesitated and fidgeted in her chair and grew very red under her black veil, and wished Colonel Schuyler would not scan her as curiously as he was doing. At last, with a great effort, she began:

“My daughter has told me all that has passed between you, and I am come with a message from her.”

94“A message!” Col. Schuyler repeated, in some surprise; “I supposed she was to write.”

He did not like this interference by a third person, and that person a woman, whom his sister had described as “pushing and inquisitive,” and for whom he had conceived a prejudice without knowing why. She was very deferential, almost cringing in her manner, and her voice was apologetic in its tone, as she replied:

“Yes, I know, she meant to send a letter, and she did commence one yesterday, but grew so nervous over it that she finally gave it up, and allowed me to come instead.”

Here she stopped a moment, and her hands worked together restlessly while Col. Schuyler, in haste to know the worst, if worst there were, said stiffly:

“Well, you are here, then, to say your daughter has refused me;” and as he spoke the words, he was conscious of a sharp pang which told him how hard such news would be to bear, and when Mrs. Barrett continued, “No, not to tell you that,” the revulsion of feeling was so great that, forgetful of his aversion for his prospective mother-in-law, he arose and came near to her, while she continued:

“Her acceptance depends wholly upon yourself, and how you take the story I am here to tell, and which she could not write. Some years ago, when Edith was very young, scarcely fifteen, she fell in love with a well-meaning, good-looking youth, greatly her inferior in the social scale, though perfectly respectable, I believe. Of course, I opposed it, both on account of her extreme youth and because, as the daughter of a clergyman, with good family blood, she ought to do better. Without my knowledge, however, they were engaged, and would have been married if he had not been suddenly killed. It was a terrible shock to Edith, and one from which she has never quite recovered. You know something of that spasmodic affection of her throat which attacks her at times. It came upon her then, and now when an allusion is made to the violent death of any one, or she is over-excited, she experiences the same peculiar sensation, so that I try to keep her as quiet as possible, and 95when I found that writing to you about it, as she felt she must, was affecting her so much, I persuaded her to desist and let me come instead. She is morbidly conscientious, and would not for the world marry you until you knew all about her past life. She loved the young man with such love as very young girls feel; but that was years ago, and now I do not believe she would marry him if he were living. She bade me tell you everything, and say that if, after hearing it, you still wished her to be your wife, she would do her best to make you happy, stipulating only that no reference shall ever be made to a past which it is her duty and wish to forget.”

Colonel Schuyler was not much given to talking at any time, and he surely had no desire to speak to his fiancée of her dead love. Could he have had his choice in the matter there should have been no dead love between himself and Edith, but when he reflected that he could not offer her his first affection, for that was buried in Emily’s grave, he felt that it was not for him to object to this poor, unknown youth who had been obliging enough to die and leave Edith free. A few times he walked up and down the room, then stopping suddenly before the anxious woman, he said, “Your daughter once hinted to me that there was something she must tell me, and as I knew her life must have been pure and innocent as a babe’s, I supposed it was a matter of this kind, and am prepared to overlook it, though of course I would rather have been the first to move her maiden heart. I will write her a few lines if you will wait here, and this afternoon or evening I shall see her.”

He bowed himself from the room, leaving Mrs. Barrett in a state of fearful suspense as to what he might write to Edith, and whether her wicked duplicity would at once be discovered. In her desire for Edith’s advancement she was willing to do anything, and the slight put upon herself was nothing to her now. She would rather have gone with Edith to her beautiful home if she could, but as she could not she accepted the condition, and was just as eager for Edith to accept the colonel as if she too were to share in the greatness. With Edith she felt almost certain that a full confession of the past would at once end everything, 96for Colonel Schuyler would hardly marry the widow of one of his workmen, and she resolved that he should not know it, at least not in time to prevent the marriage. With Edith his wife he could not help himself, and would make the best of it, if by chance it came to his knowledge, she reasoned, and when she started for Oakwood with Edith’s letter it was with no intention of giving it to him. She knew just what she would say to him, and she said it, and then waited the result.

Fifteen minutes went by and then he came back to her, and, handing her a note, said, “This is my message to Miss Lyle. I shall see her this evening and arrange our plans.”

Then he meant to go on with it, and Mrs. Barrett could almost have fallen at his feet and thanked him for raising her daughter to the position she had sinned so greatly to secure for her, but the colonel’s proud, cold manner kept her quiet, and she only said, as she took the note:

“Thank you, sir; and please remember not to allude to the past, when you see her. She wished that particularly,—it excites her so much.”

“I shall be careful on that point,” he said, and with another bow he dismissed her from the room, wondering why he breathed so much freer with that woman gone, and what it was about her which affected him so unpleasantly.

“I know Edith is not like her in the least,” he said, “and I will take care to remove her from that influence as soon as possible. Two weeks will not be too soon for our marriage, and when the Atlantic rolls between us I shall be done with Mrs. Barrett forever.”

Meantime Mrs. Barrett was on her way to London, and congratulating herself upon the good luck which had not dried the seal of the note the colonel gave her. Had it been otherwise she would have opened it all the same; but Satan, whose servant she certainly was, was playing into her hands, and the envelope held together so slightly that she opened it with perfect ease, and taking out the letter, read it through with an immense amount of satisfaction, as she saw that she could show it to her daughter and not betray herself.

97“My dear Edith,” it began, “do not think I prize you less on account of anything in the past, though of course I would rather that past had never been; but it is not for me, who have loved and lost a wife, to object because of your early love, whose tragical death affected you so strangely. I trust you will overcome that difficulty in time, and be assured, that both for your sake and my own, I shall never in any way allude to the past, nor is it necessary that I should do so. You have been frank and truthful with me, and I thank you for it, and value you all the more. Had it come to me later, I might have found it harder to overlook than I do now. You are very young, and your concealment from your mother is all I can see for which to blame you in the least. Dear Edith, let it all be as if it never had been, and go with me as my wife. I want you more than ever, and I cannot give you up for a trifle. I will see you to-night and arrange for the wedding, which must take place at once, as I have already been absent too long from home, where I am needed so much, and where there will be a warm welcome for you.

“Good-by, darling, till to-night.

“Yours, forever, Howard Schuyler.”
Had there been anything in this letter to awaken a suspicion in Edith’s mind of foul play on the part of her mother, Mrs. Barrett would have unhesitatingly withheld it from her and palmed off some story of her own. But there was nothing, and she hastened home to Edith, whom she found sitting listlessly in her room with Gertie Westbrooke’s things everywhere around her, and a look of apathy upon her face, as if she were fully assured of the nature of her mother’s tidings. She knew Colonel Schuyler could not forgive, and now that the die was cast, and her chance for something better than a governess’ life lost forever, as she believed, she was conscious of a feeling of pain and weariness, and her heart cried out for what she must not have.

As her mother entered the room she lifted her eyes languidly, but said nothing until she read the letter, which made her 98pulse quicken with a new hope and a restful feeling she had not known in years.

“What did he say to you?” she asked. “Did you talk with him? Tell me all about it, please.”

And Mrs. Barrett told her just what it seemed best to tell, and said she had taken the blame upon herself for the secrecy since Abelard’s death, and that though he was, of course, surprised and shocked, he soon recovered himself, and showed how much he was in love by his readiness to forgive and let the past fade into oblivion.

To say that Mrs. Barrett’s conscience did not disturb her a little as she thus told lie after lie would not be true; but she had committed herself too far to stop now, and then it was for her interest to prevent any conversation with regard to the past between the Colonel and Edith, and she continued:

“Oh, one thing more I must tell you. Possibly Colonel Schuyler may have said something of the kind in his letter. He is quite as averse to any allusions to the past as you can be, and said distinctly that he did not wish you to mention the subject to him. He is satisfied, and that is enough.”

Edith did not reply. She was reading the note again, and feeling a little hurt and disappointed that no direct mention had been made of Abelard.

“He might at least have been generous enough to say how grateful he was to him for having saved Godfrey’s life,” she said to her mother, who answered:

“He did say that to me, and spoke very feelingly of him, and was glad he honored his memory as he did; but you know how proud he is, and must understand that it would grate upon his pride to think his bride elect had been the wife of his servant. I think myself it would be bad taste in him to go to lauding the dead husband of the woman he intends to make his wife. You surely have no desire to praise the Lady Emily, or even to talk of her, and you must give him the same liberty of reticence.”

Edith was silenced and satisfied. If Colonel Schuyler had praised her husband to her mother, that was enough, and she 99appreciated the motives which kept him silent to her, and as the day wore on there crept into her heart a feeling of rest, and content, and satisfaction which she had never known before. Colonel Schuyler was a man whom she thoroughly respected and liked, and whom in time she might learn to love if she could overcome the feeling of awe with which his presence inspired her. She knew he would try to make her happy, and she more than once found herself thinking with pleasing anticipations of the beautiful home beyond the sea and the new life awaiting her. Never since the days when she arrayed herself for the coming of Abelard had she felt as much real interest in her dress as she did now when making herself ready for her lover. Choosing a pretty robe of white which had been made in Paris, she fastened a knot of lavender ribbon at her throat, and placing a white rose in her hair, was ready for him when he came at last. His wooing of Emily Rossiter had been the stiffest kind of an affair, and this, his second love-making, was stiff and formal too, as became the man. Still there was in his manner genuine kindness, and even tenderness, as he took Edith’s hands in his, and said:

“Are these dear little hands mine?”

“Yes, if you still wish to have them,” Edith answered; and then he bent down and kissed them very devoutly, as if fearful lest his breath should blow them away.

This was a great advance on his manner with Emily. To her he had merely said “This little hand is mine,” and had put it respectfully back into her lap, reserving his right to kiss her, until she was his wife, while in Edith’s case he kissed the hands he claimed as his, and held them in his own a little awkwardly, it is true, as if he did not quite know what he was doing, but still held them and looked at them, and turned them over, and thought how shapely and pretty and white they were, and how they would be improved with the jewels he meant to put upon them. And she would be improved, too, with the rich apparel he would give her; and his heart began to swell with pride as he saw in his home, and at his table, and in society, the beautiful bride, who was sure to be a success. And, as he 100talked to her, and watched the color mount into her cheeks, and saw the coy drooping of her eyes, and felt her warm breath upon his face, he was conscious of being moved as he had never been moved before, and his words and tones were almost lover-like as he talked of the future, and all he meant to do to make her happy. And only once was there the slightest allusion to the past, and then Edith said to him: “And you are sure that you do not care for what has made me so unhappy?”

“Care! no. I told you as much in my letter. That is all gone by. Don’t let us mention it now, or ever,” he said, as he wound his arm around Edith, who felt that she might indeed forget the past, and take the good offered to her in the new life coming.

It was late when Col. Schuyler left her that night, and before he went he had arranged everything with that precision which marked all his actions. They were to be married very quietly within the next three weeks, and then, after a short trip into the country, go at once on shipboard, and sail for America. The bridal outfit would come from Paris, whither he would forward his order the next day. He would also write at once to Godfrey, who would join them in time to be present at the ceremony. There were to be no invited guests, and only a simple breakfast at Oakwood. The heir was there now, but he had offered the hospitality of the house to Col. Schuyler for as long a time as he chose to accept it, and when told of the projected marriage, had asked the privilege of furnishing the breakfast. Thus matters were arranged, and Edith, who had cared and thought for herself so long, was glad to leave everything to Col. Schuyler and let him plan and think for her. She was beginning to like him very much, and when he brought her the engagement ring, and she saw the superb diamond on her finger, she felt a throb of pride and quiet exultation that at last the ease and luxury which her fine tastes fitted her to appreciate and enjoy were to be hers without stint or limit. That morning, too, a French modiste came and took her measure, and when the second night of her betrothal closed in, the 101order was on its way to Paris for “an entire outfit for a young bride whose wealth would warrant any expenditure.”

CHAPTER XVI.
BREAKING THE NEWS.

odfrey returned to Oakwood two weeks before the wedding, and brought with him a young artist, Robert Macpherson, whom he had found in Rome, and who had accompanied him to Russia. As he had not received his father’s letter he was ignorant of the engagement, and Colonel Schuyler blushed like a school boy, and stammered and hesitated, when he tried to tell him. Godfrey had asked for Miss Lyle, and the colonel, after replying that she was with her mother, had continued:

“My son, you may be surprised,—no, you can hardly be surprised, knowing her as you do,—when I tell you that I am,—yes, I am about to,—am going to,—give you a new mother. Yes,” and the colonel walked to the window and spat on a rosebush outside, and wiped his face, and mustering all his courage, added: “Miss Lyle has promised to be my wife, and you will agree with me, I think, that she is a remarkable,—yes, a very remarkable woman.”

He had told his story, and waited for Godfrey’s reply, which came first in a low, suppressed whistle, and then in a merry laugh as he jumped up, and giving his pants a violent shake, said: “I agree with you, father; she is a very remarkable woman, or she would not consent to be my mother and Jule’s; My! won’t she pick her eyes out, and Aunt Christine will help her. Why, she meant to have you herself!”

“Who, Christine?” Colonel Schuyler said, aghast at the very idea of wedding a woman whom he detested, even though she was a Rossiter, and the sister of his wife.

“Yes, she has set her cap at you ever since mother died, and she came up to Hampstead with all her wraps and confounded 102drugs, and raised Cain generally,” Godfrey replied, and his father smiled a pleased kind of smile, and, man-like, was conscious of a new interest in the woman who had “set her cap for him,” while at the same time he felt intense satisfaction in thinking of Edith in all her youth and brilliant beauty, and comparing her with Aunt Christine, whose body was one great receptacle of drugs, and who, Godfrey said, wore two flannel wraps in the summer, and four in the winter, besides shawls and scarfs innumerable.

Godfrey’s preference was evidently for Edith, and so his father said to him: “You do not object. You like Miss Lyle, I believe.”

“Like her? Yes, I rather think I do, and if she’d been younger, or I older, I’d have gone for her myself. She’s the most splendid woman I ever saw, but, by Jove, I’m sorry for her, though, for what with Aunt Christine, and Alice, and Julia, and Tiffe and Em, she’ll have a sorry time.”

The colonel frowned darkly, and his eyebrows almost met together as he answered with great dignity:

“Everybody in my house must treat my wife with respect; but, Godfrey, perhaps it may be well in your letter home to speak a good word for Miss Lyle, prepare the way, you know. You have great influence over Julia, or at least over Miss Creighton, which amounts to the same thing. I have written, of course, but would like you to do so, too.”

“Certainly, with pleasure,” Godfrey said, and there was a merry twinkle in his saucy eyes as he thought of the “hornet’s nest” he would stir up at home.

The colonel had that day written to his eldest daughter, Julia, in his usual dignified manner, that he was about to marry Miss Edith Lyle, “a lady of good family, the daughter of a clergyman, the friend and companion of my deceased sister, your late Aunt Sinclair. She possesses many and varied accomplishments, and is, what I consider, a very remarkable person, and I shall expect a kind reception for her, and that all due deference will be paid to her by every member of my household. Break the news to your Aunt Christine, and tell Mrs. 103Tiffe to have the rooms in the south wing made ready for Mrs. Schuyler. I have written to Perry about repairing them, but she must superintend it.”

This was in part the colonel’s letter, while Godfrey’s was widely different.

“We are in for a step-mother, sure,” he wrote, “and may as well make the best of it. Try to imagine father in love, will you? and such a love! Truly she is ‘a very remarkable person,’ as you will say when you see her. Just think of father’s marrying a red-haired woman of forty, with a limp and glass eye, which looks at you with a squint, and a crack in her voice, which sounds like Ettie Armstrong’s old piano, and quite as many aches and pains as Aunt Christine herself! But then, she’s nice, and I like her ever so much, while the governor,—well, it is something wonderful to see how far gone he is; and I tell you, girls, one and all, that if you do not treat this beauty with proper attention there will be the old Nick to pay! She will take your breath away at first, for, after all I have said, you have no idea how she looks, and Alice must hold on to her little nose, and Aunt Christine may as well lay in a fresh supply of pills and Crown Bitters, and get her a new galvanic battery. She’ll need them all to steady her nerves after the shock the bride will give her. I shall be glad to be home once more, though I do not believe I am greatly improved with foreign travel. I still shake down my pants, and say ‘by Jove,’ and don’t believe I shall be ‘so disgusted with New York because it looks so new and backwoodsey,’ or that I shall constantly quote ‘dear, charming Par-ee.’ In short, I am just as much a ‘clown’ as ever, but by way of recompense I mean, if I can, to bring you the nicest kind of a travelled chap, Robert Macpherson, whom I met in Rome, and like so much, even if he does part his hair in the middle, and carry an eyeglass, and put perfumery into his bath, and wear ruffled night-shirts buttoned behind. He’s a good fellow, with money, and a profession, too. He is an artist, and his father was cousin to Lord Somebody or other, and I mean to persuade him to come to America with me for you girls to pull caps about. So you’ve something to live for 104besides the new mamma, to whom I must pay my respects as soon as I have finished this letter. So no more at present from your brother,

Godfrey.”
The young scamp chuckled with delight as he read over this letter and thought what a bombshell it would be in the staid household at Schuyler Hill.

“I haven’t written a lie either,” he said; “I only told them to think of father’s fancying such a person, and they will think of it, and Aunt Christine will have a fit and swallow more than a quart of her bitters, and take a shock strong enough to knock her down, and Jule’s back will be up, and Alice’s nose, and Em will cry, and Tiffe will snort her indignation, and there’ll be thunder raised generally.”

After these remarks Godfrey folded his letter and shook himself down, and looked in the glass, and started for Caledonia Street to call upon Edith. He found her at home, looking so beautiful as she rose to meet him, with the flush on her cheek, and the new expression of peace and quiet in her eyes, that he was conscious of a sharp pang of regret for the years which lay between them. Then, as he remembered the woman of forty, with the limp and glass eye, and thought of the consternation at Schuyler Hill when his letter was received, and the surprise when the bride herself should arrive, he burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter, while Edith looked wonderingly at him, with a rising color in her cheeks.

“You must excuse me,” he said, as he held her hand in his. “It seems so ridiculous to think of calling you mother.”

“Don’t do it, please,” Edith replied. “I’d rather you would not. Let me be Edith.”

And so the ice was broken, and Godfrey plunged into the subject at once, in his half-comical, half-serious way.

“Honestly,” he said, “I am real glad you are going home with us. I never liked any one outside of our family as well as I do you, and once I had serious thoughts of making love to you myself! I did, upon my word, but when I subtracted 105eighteen from twenty-eight, I said ‘no go.’ So far as years are concerned that is worse than Aunt Christine and father.”

“Who is Aunt Christine?”

“Have I never told you of her? Well, inasmuch as you are to be one of us, I may as well enlighten you with regard to the individuals whose step-mother you are to be. Aunt Christine is mother’s sister, an old maid, whose love died and left her his money. Since mother’s death she has been with us a great deal of her time, quarrelling with Mrs. Tiffe,—that’s the housekeeper,—bullying the servants, nagging the governess, and watching to see that father didn’t look at a bonnet with matrimony in his eye. You see, she wanted him herself, he forty-one and she forty-six, and looking almost a hundred, with all the drugs and nostrums she takes for her fancied ailments. She has the neuralgia, and catarrh, and dyspepsia, and bronchitis, and liver complaint, and doctors for them all, and has her room as full of bottles as an apothecary’s shop, and sits with a dish of tar under her nose, and takes galvanic shocks, and has her hair dressed every day, and wears the richest of silk and finest of lace, and really looks splendidly when she is dressed,—was handsome once, and is very exclusive and aristocratic, and proud of her Rossiter blood, and will never rest until she knows a person’s pedigree, root and branch.”

There were little red spots on Edith’s cheeks and neck as she thought of Aunt Christine finding her out, root and branch. But, after all, what did it matter, so long as her husband knew and did not care? she reflected, and grew calm again, and amused, as Godfrey went on:

“I like her, of course, for she is very kind to me, but I would not have father marry her for the world. Not that he ever thought of it, though she has; and the time he rode out with Ettie Armstrong, the schoolmistress, she was so angry, and wondered how he could let himself down, and he a Schuyler, who had married a Rossiter!”

“Ettie Armstrong! That’s a pretty name,” Edith said, while there came before her mind the vision of a dark-eyed girl who 106had promised to care for Abelard’s grave, and to whom she had confessed her love for the dead.

“Yes, ’tis a pretty name,” Godfrey said; “though Ettie herself is not pretty. She is most an old maid, I guess, and teaches the village school, and thrashed me like fun the summer I went to her, but never hit me a lick amiss. Father rode with her once,—a mere happen-so,—and Aunt Christine was furious. I say, Edith, except his age, father is a catch, and you a lucky fellow. Why, half the women in New York and Hampstead are after him, and have been ever since mother died. Even at her funeral, when the clergyman, in eulogizing her and telling what a loss she was to her family, asked ‘Who is there to fill her place?’ twenty old maids hopped up——”

“Oh, Godfrey!” Edith exclaimed, shocked at his levity; “you should not talk that way.”

Up to this point Godfrey had rattled on as if he had never had a serious thought or known a genuine feeling of affection; but at Edith’s rebuke the whole expression of his face changed instantly. His chin quivered, and his voice trembled, as he said:

“You think me, no doubt, an unfeeling wretch, who never cared for anybody; but you mistake me there. I loved my mother so much that I never go to sleep at night without thinking of her in heaven, and praying, in my poor way, that I may go to her some day; and I feel her hand on my head, and hear her dying voice bidding me try to be good; and I have tried every day. I loved my mother dearly, and the knowing that father will marry again brings her back to me, and I’ve rattled on like a fool just to keep—to keep—to keep from crying outright for the mother who died.”

He was crying now, and Edith cried with him and held his head on her lap, where he involuntarily laid it, while he sobbed out his grief. Nor did she like him less for it. Indeed, the bond between them was stronger than ever, now that she saw how deep his feelings were, and that under his gay exterior was hidden so much genuine affection and sterling worth. As she would have soothed and comforted a brother, she soothed and 107comforted him until the little burst was over, and lifting up his head, he said in his old playful way:

“There, I’ve had it out, and cried in your lap anyway. Quite a little tempest, wasn’t it? I say, Edith, you are not to think I don’t want you to marry father, for I do. I like you ever so much, and I’m going to stand by you through thick and thin, and at first there’ll be more thick than thin, for Julia will not be pleased with a step-mother, and Em will follow Julia, and Alice, who is there a great deal, will sniff any way, and Aunt Christine will ride her highest horse; but you are sure to win in the end. Only wear your most queen-like air, and keep a stiff upper lip, and act as if born to the purple, and you’ll conquer at last, with the governor and me to uphold you. It’s a grand old place, and you’ll be happy there. Who is that? Look quick, do,” he exclaimed suddenly, and glancing toward the window Edith saw a cab standing before the gate, and a plainly dressed woman coming up the walk.

“That is Mrs. Rogers,” she said. “She lodges here, but has been absent several weeks. We were not expecting her so soon.”

“Mrs. Rogers,” Godfrey repeated. “I don’t mean that woman. It’s the girl in the cab, with the bright hair and blue eyes, and the prettiest face I ever saw. I wish she’d look out again.”

“That must be Gertie Westbrooke, Mrs. Rogers’s daughter,” Edith said. “She is very pretty, I believe, though I have never seen her distinctly.”

“Pretty! I should think she was! Why, she’s beautiful. I wish Bob Macpherson could see that face and paint it. He went off this morning to find some friends of his, but he’ll be back to the wedding. He is an artist I found in Rome. You are sure to like him. I must go now. Good-by, mother that is to be.”

He kissed her fondly, and then hurried out to see again the face in the cab. Very curiously he gazed at the child, whose little fat hands went up to the eyes, ostensibly to push back the stray locks of auburn hair, but really to hide the blushing face. How pretty they looked as they lay like white rose leaves against the mass of bright wavy hair, and how Godfrey deplored 108the absence of Robert Macpherson, and wished he were himself a painter as he walked away, carrying with him that image of Gertie Westbrooke, with the shy, timid look on her face, the bright hair veiling her soft blue eyes and the white hands brushing back the hair.

CHAPTER XVII.
THE BRIDAL.

ary Rogers had been in the country for several weeks and had written to Mrs. Barrett that she was to return to London sooner than she had intended, as Gertie was not very well and needed the advice of her physician. To this Mrs. Barrett had at once replied, telling of the approaching marriage and asking Mrs. Rogers to defer her return as long as possible, as Miss Lyle was at home and occupying Gertie’s room. Accompanying this letter to Mrs. Rogers was one from Norah Long, who also told of the expected marriage of Colonel Schuyler with Miss Lyle, and the breakfast to be given at Oakwood, and then added that as both the colonel and Miss Lyle wished her to accompany them to America, she had decided to do so, provided her cousin Mary, to whom she was strongly attached, would go too. Colonel Schuyler owned several cottages, he said, and Mary could have one, if she liked, at a low rent.

Two days before the receipt of this letter Mrs. Rogers had heard of the failure of the bank where her money was invested, and knew that henceforth she must earn her own living. This she could do better in America, and after due reflection she wrote to Norah that she would go, and started for London the next day, intending to take up her abode in the vicinity of Oakwood until the time for sailing. And that is how the cab came to be standing at Mrs. Barrett’s door. Gertie did not alight, but waited while Mrs. Rogers explained to Mrs. Barrett the change in her circumstances and plans, and said that she 109would come in a few days and take her things away. Mingled with Mrs. Barrett’s exultation at her daughter’s good fortune there had been more than one feeling of loneliness and desolation as she thought of being alone in her old age, even if that old age was to be well provided for, as Colonel Schuyler had promised. But there was one comfort left her in little Gertie Westbrooke, whom, with Mary Rogers, she meant to keep as long as possible. She was not fond of children, but no one could resist the bright, sunny little girl who filled the house with so much life and gladness, and whose feet and hands were always ready for some act of kindness. And Mrs. Barrett loved the beautiful child with a strong, intense love, which she could not define, unless it was that the child loved her and hung about her neck with soft caresses and words of love. And now she was going away,—and the woman’s heart was heavy as lead, and there were traces of tears on her face as she went about her usual work and thought of the desolate future with Gertie Westbrooke gone.

Owing to Mrs. Sinclair’s health Edith had not visited her mother very often during the past year, and had never met Gertie face to face, so she was only sorry for her mother in a general kind of way when she heard that she was to be left alone. She was very much occupied with her own affairs, and Colonel Schuyler and Godfrey took all her leisure time. The colonel came every other day, Godfrey every day, and between them both she had little time for reflection, but was hurried on toward the end, which approached so fast, until at last the very day had come, a soft, warm August day, when the sky seemed to smile in anticipation of the bridal, and the whole earth to laugh for joy. And Edith felt happy and glad and peaceful as she dressed herself for the occasion, and with her mother and Norah Long, her waiting-maid, started for the church near Oakwood, where her bridegroom waited for her, and where just a few of the late Mrs. Sinclair’s friends were assembled. Thanks to Godfrey and Robert Macpherson, who had returned from visiting his friends, the little church was decked with flowers, and Edith stood under a canopy of roses as she pledged her 110troth a second time, and was made Mrs. Howard Schuyler. Just to the right of the chancel, and where they could command a good view of everything, Mary Rogers sat, and with her Gertie Westbrooke. It was the child’s first sight of a wedding, and when that morning Mary had said to her, “Gertie, how would you like to go to church to-day and see Miss Lyle married?” she had clapped her hands for joy, and could scarcely eat her breakfast for thinking and talking of the wonderful wedding.

“Don’t they sometimes throw a bouquet at the bride’s feet?” she asked.

And when told that they did, she gathered and arranged an exquisite little bouquet, which she tied with a white ribbon, and then, moved by some impulse she did not try to define, she wrote on a slip of paper, in her childish hand:

“From little Gertie Westbrooke, with her love, and God bless you.”

This she folded and put inside the flowers, saying to herself:

“She’ll know who Gertie Westbrooke is, and maybe speak to me on the ship.”

Gertie was much interested in the beautiful lady, whom she had occasionally seen from the window when Edith came to call upon Mrs. Barrett, and her interest was increased when she heard she was to be married to a gentleman rich enough and grand enough to be a lord, and that she was to see the sight, and then go to America in the same vessel with the bridal pair.

It was all like a bit of romance, and the little girl’s heart beat high, and her cheeks were like carnation, as she arranged her bright hair and twisted a blue ribbon in it, and put on her best muslin dress, and the string of pearl beads a lady had given her at the last Christmas, and then went with Mary to the church, where, with her face all flushed and eager, she stood with her dimpled white arms leaning on the pew railing, her straw hat falling back from her head, and her sparkling blue eyes fixed upon the bridal party as it came up the aisle.

“Look, Bob! there’s the very face I told you about, over 111there in the corner!” Godfrey whispered to Robert Macpherson, with a pinch of the arm, which made Bob wince with pain.

But he saw the face, and started suddenly,—it was so like another dear little face lying under the daisies in the English sunshine. The same blue eyes, the same sweet mouth, the same bright, flowing hair he had tried so hard to put upon the canvas, and failed each time he tried, because of the treacherous memory, which, good in other things, could not retain with vividness the image of the lost one, loved so passionately and laid away from sight amid so many tears and heart-throbs.

“The likeness is wonderful,” he thought. “I must ascertain who this child is. Schuyler will find her for me.”

The ceremony was commencing now, and all eyes were fixed upon the bride, save those of Robert Macpherson. He looked only at Gertie Westbrooke, who, unconscious of his gaze, stood watching Edith in silent wonder and admiration, thinking how beautiful she was in her rich bridal robes, and how happy she must be,—only the bridegroom was a trifle too old, and dignified, and grave, Gertie thought; and then, as she glanced at the tall, handsome Godfrey, she thought if she were the bride she should prefer him to the father, and she wondered a little at Edith’s choice.

“I require and charge you both that if either of you know any impediment why ye may not be lawfully joined together, ye do now confess it. For be ye well assured that if any persons are joined together otherwise than as God’s word doth allow, their marriage is not lawful.”

The clergyman uttered these words with great solemnity, and by mere chance, looked full at Edith, who involuntarily raised her eyes, and felt glad that there was nothing unconfessed on her part. Had there been, she must have shrieked it out even then at the last moment. But Col. Schuyler knew all about that grave at Schuyler Hill; all about the baby girl who died, and liked her just the same. There was no reason on her part why she should not be his wife, and she met the clergyman’s eyes frankly, and felt a thrill of joy and peace even while she wondered if the bridegroom thought of that other bridal, when 112Abelard Lyle stood beside her in Mr. Calvert’s parlor, with Emily looking on. And Godfrey had been there too, his first experience of a wedding, perhaps. Had he ever thought of it since? Would his father ever tell him who the boy-husband was, who the childish bride? Probably not, and it was just as well. Godfrey had no concern in her past; only the father was interested, and if he was satisfied, that was sufficient. Thus Edith reasoned to herself, and saw the broad band of gold upon her finger, and felt the pressure of her hand which the colonel gave her, and knew that he was glad because of her, and when it all was over she left the altar as happy as half the brides who embark upon the sea of matrimony, with the uncertain future before them.

As she turned and passed near Gertie, a bouquet fell at her feet, and the face of the child who threw it was something wonderful to look at as she watched to see if her gift would be observed and accepted. It was, for Godfrey and Robert both sprang forward to get it, but Godfrey was the one who picked it up, and turning toward Gertie, he pressed it to his lips, and then, with a sign which Gertie understood, indicated that the bride should have it.

“Oh, wasn’t it nice, though!” Gertie said, when she was home again, and talking of the event. “Such a sweet, beautiful lady, only I thought her face was kind of sorry, and Col. Schuyler was a great deal too old. I’d rather have the son, Mr. Godfrey, you call him. His face is smooth and handsome, and his eyes so full of fun. He is the one who looked at me so in the cab at Mrs. Barrett’s, and he stared at me to-day, and kissed my flowers. I like Godfrey Schuyler ever so much. Do you believe I’ll see him in America?”

Mrs. Rogers had listened with a good deal of interest to Gertie’s remarks about the wedding, but when she came to Godfrey, and began to speculate upon the probability of seeing him in America, a shadow flitted across her face, and she said: “Gertie, listen a moment. You probably will see Mr. Godfrey Schuyler in America, and perhaps on shipboard, and if he noticed you in the cab and at church, as you say he did, he may try to 113talk to you, but you are not to encourage him. Gentlemen’s sons do not talk to girls like you for any good.”

Gertie lifted her great blue eyes to her auntie’s face a moment, and then, casting them down, seemed to be thinking for a time, when she said, suddenly:

“Auntie, wasn’t my mother a lady, and wasn’t my old home most as big and pretty as Oakwood?”

“Yes,” was the reply; and Gertie continued:

“Then why should not a gentleman’s son talk to me for good?”

“I cannot explain to you now, only seeing you with me, and knowing you are my adopted child, they would naturally place you in my rank; do you understand?” Mrs. Rogers said; and Gertie replied:

“Yes, but I could tell them;” then after a moment she added: “Auntie, who can I talk to? You said those children at the farmhouse were not good enough for me to associate with, and that people like Mr. Godfrey are too good.”

It was a puzzling question, which Mary Rogers could not answer satisfactorily. She had carefully guarded her beautiful child from all contact with children of her own rank, and as she could not hope to find friends in the higher circles, Gertie had led a secluded life and knew very little of young people, and what they did and said. In one sense this made her old, and in other respects she was much more a child than a girl of twelve should be. But the latter character suited Mary, who wished she might keep her darling always as she was now, her very own, with no other love or interest between them. The thought of Godfrey Schuyler jarred upon her painfully, as if through him mischief might come to her pet, and so she raised a note of warning, which Gertie pondered upon the remainder of the day, wondering if she should see him on the ship, and if he would speak to her, and what she should say if he did, and who the man was who parted his hair in the middle, and stared at her quite as hard as Godfrey did, only in a different way, and wondered what her aunt would say if she knew she had given an old photograph of herself to Abel Browning, the freckled boy at 114the farmhouse, who cried when she came away, and told her “she was the ’andsomest girl he had ever saw.”

“I just wish I was one thing or the other,” the little girl said to herself. “It is real mean to be too good to play with Abel and Bettie Browning, and not good enough to be talked to and looked at by Mr. Godfrey Schuyler.”

CHAPTER XVIII.
AT OAKWOOD AFTER THE BRIDAL.

he wedding breakfast was over, and Edith was in her room with her maid, Norah Long, and her mother, dressing for the short trip she was to make into the country before embarking for her new home.

There were many beautiful bouquets on her table, and Norah was to keep them for her till she returned, especially the one thrown at her feet by Gertie Westbrooke. Godfrey had brought this to her and told her whence it came, and she had found the slip of paper hidden in it, and read, “From little Gertie Westbrooke, with her love, and God bless you.”

She had received costly gifts that day, but with none had there come a “God bless you,” save with this tiny bouquet, and as she placed it herself in water, she whispered: “I do believe it’s the only blessing I have had. I’ll find the child when I come back, and thank her for it.”

She was dressed at last in her handsome black silk, with her jaunty round hat and feather, which made her look so young and girlish, and then turning to Norah she bade her leave the room, as she wished to be alone with her mother for a few moments.

“Mother,” she said, when the door had closed on Norah, “Col. Schuyler is so kind and generous, he has told me to ask him anything to-day, and he will grant it; and so I have concluded just for once to bring up the past and ask him if, before leaving England, I may find where baby was buried, and order 115her a grave-stone. You can attend to it, you know, and I shall feel that everything has been done which I ought to do. What do you think of it?”

She was buttoning her gloves as she turned toward her mother, but stopped suddenly, struck by the expression of the face which met her eyes, and which she knew meant so much.

“Do nothing of the kind. Are you crazy, girl? Never allude to the child, if you wish to be happy.”

Mrs. Barrett spoke rapidly and excitedly; and with a nameless terror of some threatened danger, Edith asked:

“Why, mother? Why not mention the child to-day, when he said, ask what I pleased? Why must I not?”

“Because—because—” and Mrs. Barrett came close to her and whispered: “He don’t know there was a child. I did not tell him that.”

“Don’t know there was a child!” Edith repeated. “What do you mean? I wrote it in the letter,—all, everything; if he read it he knows about my baby. Moth——! Moth——!”

She could not say the whole name,—could not articulate another word, for the awful suspicion which flashed upon her, bringing back the hand which clutched her in a death-like grasp, and made her writhe and gasp for breath.

“Edith, listen to me;” and Mrs. Barrett spoke sternly. “It is time this folly ended. Do you think I would let you throw away the chance for which I had waited so long? Had Colonel Schuyler known the truth as you wrote it, he would not have married you, and as your mother it was my duty to interfere and save you from the consequences of your rashness. I kept your letter, and told him what I liked. I said you were in love when very young,—scarcely fifteen,—that the object of your love was greatly your inferior, and that I opposed the affair—that in spite of all you were secretly engaged, and would have been married, no doubt, had he not been suddenly killed. I told him, too, that the manner of his death was a fearful shock to your nerves, from which you had not yet recovered, as you now sometimes felt a choking sensation in your throat when 116reminded of the past, and asked him never to refer to it if he wished to spare you pain. He promised he would not. He did not ask the name of the young man, nor where he lived; indeed, he was not at all anxious to discuss the matter, and stopped me before I was quite done by telling me he had heard enough, and that he was satisfied. I think, however, he was annoyed, and you can judge what would have been the result had I given him your letter. Believe me, I acted for the best, and though you can now tell him, if you like, I trust you have too much good sense to do so, or at least will take time to consider. You are his wife; nothing can alter that, and the past cannot in any way affect him, provided he knows nothing of it. To tell him now would be to wound him cruelly, and my advice to you is to let the matter rest, and take the good offered to you.”

Edith made no reply. Indeed, she could not have spoken to have saved her life for the choking, palpitating sensation in her throat, where her heart seemed beating wildly with such throbs of pain as she had never felt before. Gradually as her mother talked she had sank down upon the couch where she lay in a crumpled heap, her face as white as ashes, and her eyes staring wildly like the eyes of one choking to death. And when at last she spoke, it was only in a whisper that she said:

“Oh, mother, you make me wish I was dead.”

There was the sound of wheels upon the gravelled road, and Col. Schuyler’s voice at the door, saying the carriage was waiting.

“Let it wait; I cannot go now,” Edith gasped, trying in vain to struggle to her feet, and then falling back among the cushions, weak and powerless to help herself.

Opening the door Mrs. Barrett bade Col. Schuyler enter, and then closing it again drew him quickly into the little dressing-room before he caught sight of Edith lying so still and helpless in her misery.

“I am sorry, but I suppose she cannot help it,” she began, “she is so weak and nervous; but something I said to her of that early affair, you know, has affected Edith so much as almost 117to bring on a faint, and she is there on the sofa, unable to sit up. Be very gentle with her, do. It is all my fault.”

For a man to be told that his two hours’ bride has fainted because reminded of a former love affair, is not very pleasant, and Col. Schuyler grew hot and cold, and a little annoyed. But he had known all the time that Edith’s love in its full extent was yet to be won, and so the humiliation was not nearly so hard, and his voice was very tender and kind as he bent over her, and said:

“Edith, my darling, it distresses me to see you thus. I had thought,—I had hoped,—Edith, you are not sorry you are my wife, when I am so glad?”

There was something pleading in his tone, and it roused Edith, and sitting up, she said:

“No, Col. Schuyler, I am not sorry, and Heaven helping me, I’ll be a good, true wife to you, but oh—oh—you must—bear with me, and if I am not all, or what you believe me to be, forgive me, will you? I am not to blame.”

He did not in the least know what she meant, nor did he care. She was excited and nervous, he thought, and he tried to comfort and soothe her, and laid her head on his shoulder and held her closely to him, and told her to calm herself, and motioned Mrs. Barrett away with a gesture of impatience, and when Godfrey came to the door, and said, “Hurry up, or you’ll be late,” he answered back, “Send the carriage away. We will take the next train. Mrs. Schuyler is suddenly ill and cannot go just yet.”

He had called her Mrs. Schuyler, she was his wife, and a feeling of reassurance and quiet began to steal over Edith as she sat with her head on her husband’s shoulder and his arm around her waist, and with this feeling came a sensation akin to love for the man who was so kind to her and who had been so deceived. But not by her; she was not to blame, and she meant to tell him all, but not then. It was neither the time nor the place. It should be when they were away alone, before the day was over, and then if he chose to put her from him, and go back without her, he could do so, and she would say it was right. 118She grew better rapidly after this decision was reached, and though her face was very pale, and there was a frightened look in her eyes, she met her friends at last with a smile, and gave some laughing excuse for her sudden faintness,—said the day was warm,—that she had not been well or slept much for weeks,—that she was subject to such attacks, but thought it most unfortunate that she should have one that day of all others.

She was much better when the time for the next train drew near, but there was a steady avoidance of her mother, who had deceived her so,—a coldness of manner which Mrs. Barrett felt but did not mind. So long as her end was obtained she was not scrupulous as to the means. She loved her daughter in her way, and now that she was Mrs. Howard Schuyler she would like to make much of her and be made much of in return, but if Edith was foolish enough to resent the means she had used to place her where she was, she could not help it, and bore her punishment very meekly, and was not at all demonstrative when at last her daughter said good-by to her just as she said it to the others and took her seat in the carriage.

Col. Schuyler noticed the formal leave-taking, and though he was better pleased to have it thus than he would have been had there been kissing and crying over the woman he secretly disliked and distrusted, he was a little surprised, and wondered if it were a feeling of pride born of her elevation which had so soon affected Edith.

Alas, he little understood her or dreamed of the conflict going on in her mind as she was borne rapidly along the road, through the beautiful English country, to the place where they were to spend the night and where Edith meant to tell him all.

119
CHAPTER XIX.
THE BRIDAL DAYS.

inner was over in the house where they had stopped for the night, and drawing his chair near to the open window of their little parlor, Col. Schuyler sat down to enjoy the sweet summer air, as it came stealing in laden with the perfume of flowers and the freshly-cut hay upon the lawn of the castle near by. Edith was in the dressing-room adjoining, pretending to arrange her hair, but in reality trying to make up her mind how to begin the story she must tell. And how would he receive it? Would he spurn her at once, or, rather than let the world know of his disgrace, would he keep her with him, a wife merely in name, whom he never could love or respect?

“Oh, Father in Heaven,” she whispered, “you know I am not to blame in this; help me to tell him, and incline him to receive it aright.”

Strengthened by this prayer for aid, she gave herself no time, for further hesitation, but going swiftly to her husband’s side she laid her hand on his shoulder in an appealing kind of way and said to him, softly:

“Colonel Schuyler!”

During the few hours in which the colonel had had Edith all to himself and felt that she really was his own, he had almost fallen in love with her in sober earnest. Before that day he had greatly admired and liked and respected and desired her, but something in the actual possession of her had stirred a deeper feeling in his heart than mere pride in her personal attractions, and when he felt the touch of her hand and heard the sound of her voice, a great throb of delight thrilled through his veins, and drawing her to him he made her sit upon his knee, and smoothing her cheek caressingly, said to her:

“Don’t call me Colonel Schuyler, please. I’d rather be Howard to you, now that you are my wife. It will seem to lessen the years between us, and I do not want to be so much 120older than my darling. Call me Howard now, and let me hear how it sounds.”

“Not yet,” Edith said; “not till I have told you something which should have been told before, and which may make a difference.”

She spoke slowly and painfully, and Colonel Schuyler detected signs of choking in her voice, and guessing at once that she was thinking of the early lover, said to her, very kindly but firmly: “Don’t, Edith, please; don’t tell me anything which will distress you. I do not wish to hear it. Your mother told me enough,—all I care to know,—and I am satisfied.”

“But, Howard,”—she called him thus involuntarily, and there was a world of pathos and pitiful entreaty in her voice, while the eyes she fixed upon him were swimming in tears—“but, Howard, mother did not tell you the whole——”

“Then you need not,” he answered, quickly. “If you are pure, and good, and true, that is all I ask, and I know you are all of these. I daresay your mother did not tell me as eloquently as you could have told me how much you loved that man, and how your heart ached for him; and you wish me to know it all, but I am satisfied. You are my wife, and nothing can make any difference, even if you were his widow, instead of his affianced, though widows are not to my taste. I am satisfied, and to prove that I am, I do not even care to know his name or where he lived. In fact, I would rather not know it, would rather you should never refer to it again, for it is not a pleasant topic; and now for the favor you were to ask me on our wedding day, and which I was to grant even to half my kingdom.”

He spoke playfully and held her closer to him while the hot tears poured over Edith’s face. What should she do? Should she tell him in spite of his protest and his assurance that he was satisfied? She could not with the memory of his words, “Widows are not to my taste,” still ringing in her ears, and so she let the opportunity pass, and the only favor she asked was that whatever might come in the future he would have faith in her and believe that she meant to do right.

121“Of course I will, you foolish little girl. You are nervous and tired to-night,” he said; and then, as if struck with a sudden thought, he added: “Only tell me one thing,—if that young man had lived and not improved beyond what he was when you knew him, and you had grown to be what you are, could you have loved him now as you did then?”

“Perhaps not. I never thought of it in that light,” Edith said; and her husband continued:

“One question more. Do you believe you can in time love me as well as you did him?”

“Yes, Howard, I know I can,” Edith spoke quickly, and her arms wound themselves involuntarily around her husband’s neck, while for the first time she kissed him unsolicited.

“Then, my darling,” he responded, “there is nothing before us but happiness, if God so wills it, and may He deal by me as I do by you, my precious wife.”

He was growing to love her so fast, and Edith knew it, and felt her misery giving way, and her heart grew light again as it had been when she fancied he knew the whole.

Edith had known from the first that it was the colonel’s plan to visit Alnwick and go over the grand old castle which at this season of the year was open to visitors, and she did not oppose him, though the neighborhood of Alnwick was fraught with sad memories for her as having been Abelard’s home. His friends were still living there, she knew from Godfrey, and the first night at the inn where they took rooms was passed in wakefulness, with a feeling of oppression and sadness which she could not shake off. Abelard had told her so much of Alnwick and the castle, and had talked of the time when she would visit it with him; and now, he was dead, and she was there, the wife of another man, with that great secret weighing her down at times and casting a shadow on everything. How she wished she might see his home and the old mother he used to talk of so fondly, and yet when her husband said to her one morning: “Edith, I am going to call on some poor people who live about two miles from here. Perhaps you will like to go with me when I tell you who they are,” she trembled and grew cold, and 122scarcely heard a word of the story he told her, and which she knew so much better than he did. “I called upon them last summer,” he said, “when Godfrey was with me, and it is not necessary that I should go again, but I know it will please them, and I am so happy myself that I feel like conferring happiness on others. Will you go, darling? They will feel honored if I bring them my young bride.”

“Oh, Howard, no! Please don’t ask me. I’d so much rather not,” Edith cried, feeling how terrible it would be to go with her husband into the presence of Abelard’s mother and hear her talk of him, as she assuredly would.

She could not do it, and she expressed herself so decidedly, that the colonel looked at her curiously while a cloud passed over his face; and, without meaning to do so, he seemed displeased and out of sorts. He was not accustomed to have his wishes thwarted, and he had set his heart upon taking his wife with him when he visited the Lyles, and after he had told her of his indebtedness to them he thought she ought to go out of deference to his wishes. Surely it was not pride which prompted her unwillingness to call upon such people, for what business had she to be prouder than himself, he thought, and he seemed so moody and silent that Edith detected the change in his manner at once, and resolving to conquer her own personal feelings, went up to him and said:

“Howard, I have changed my mind; I will go with you if you wish it.”

His face cleared as he said: “Thank you, darling, I am very glad, both because I like to have you with me, and because I know the attention will be sure to please those people. Did I tell you of the little boy to whom Godfrey gave his name, when we stopped there last year on our way to Oakwood? He is always doing such things; has two or three namesakes at home, a thing of which I do not altogether approve, but in the case of these Nesbits I could not oppose it. Shall we start at once? It is only two miles distant; will you walk or ride?”

Edith chose to walk, and they set off together across the fresh green fields, and through the quiet, shaded lanes toward 123the low-thatched cottage where Abelard Lyle was born, and where his mother sat knitting by the door with a placid expression on her calm face, and the sunlight falling on her snowy hair. It would be impossible to describe Edith’s emotions as she walked with her husband through the lanes, and fields, and woods where her boy-lover had so often been, and where he had thought some day to bring her and show her to his mother, and it seemed to her almost as if he was there, moving silently beside her, and once when a leaf rustled at her feet, she started with a nervous cry and clung close to her husband’s arm. And yet it was not regret for the dead which thus affected her. Her life with Abelard was like a far-off dream to her now, a thing apart from herself and her present life, and had her husband known, she would not have felt as she did with that secret on her mind, making her breathe quickly, and grow faint and pale when at last the house was reached and she saw for the first time how humble and poor Abelard’s home had been. Everything pertaining to it, however, was scrupulously neat, and the little grass-plat before the door showed frequent acquaintance with sickle or shears, while the old-fashioned flowers on the narrow border told of good taste in some one. But it was all so small and meagre and poor, and the calico dress of the old lady, knitting on the porch, was faded and patched, and the white kerchief pinned about her neck was darned in several places. She had a fair, sweet old face, with a resemblance to Abelard, Edith thought, when at the sound of their footsteps she looked up with a smile of welcome and inquiry. From having always lived near the border she spoke with a broad Scotch accent, which Edith did not comprehend at first. She was evidently greatly pleased and flattered that Col. Schuyler had come to see her again, and brought his bonny bride, whose hand she held in her own, and into whose face she gazed curiously as she bade her welcome, and led her into the house where Mrs. Nesbit, the daughter, sat with her sleeves rolled up combing her long black hair, with a bit of glass before her, and Godfrey Schuyler asleep in his rude cradle.

Mrs. Nesbit, or Jenny as she was called, was not naturally 124as refined as her mother, and she kept on combing her hair without any apology, talking rapidly all the time, and saying what an honor she felt it to be for the likes of Col. Schuyler to visit the likes of them, though to be sure he owed them something for her poor brother’s death. “You know about that, I s’pose,” and she looked at Edith, whose dress she had been closely inspecting between each passage of the comb through her hair.

Edith nodded in token that she did know. She could not speak; the room was so small and so close, and the iron fingers held her throat with so firm a clutch that she could only sit perfectly still and listen while the old story was told again by Colonel Schuyler, and the mother wept silently, ejaculating now and then, “Oh, my puir bairn, my puir bairn!”

Jenny did not cry. She was looking at the bride in her rich apparel, and thinking how proud she was to be so unmoved, as if it was nothing to her how many poor men lost their lives to save that of a Schuyler. And Colonel Schuyler too had similar thoughts with Jenny, and believed it was contempt for these people and their surroundings which kept Edith so silent, in spite of his efforts to draw her into the conversation and make her seem gracious and interested. Alas! he could not guess what she was enduring as she sat there in Abelard’s home, and heard them talking of him and all the incidents concerned with his death.

“You dinna ken my lad,” the mother said to her; “an’ so you dinna ken how sair I was for him. Ah, he was a bonny lad and gude.”

Edith nodded, and the old lady went on, now addressing the colonel:

“A maun who kenned my boy and see him kilt coomed here onc’t an’ tauld me about it, and said there was a young lass there who moight be Abel’s sweetheart; heard ye tell of her like?”

No, the colonel had not heard of her, or he had forgotten, and as Edith was not supposed to know anything of the circumstances she was spared the questioning, and Mrs. Lyle went on 125to say that if there was such a lass she’d like so much to know something of her.

“Mayhap,” and she turned again to Edith; “mayhap you’ll foind her some day, and if you do wool ye let me know?”

Had her life depended upon it Edith could not have spoken, and a nod was her only answer, while her cheeks burned scarlet and the perspiration gathered about her mouth. The colonel was angry, and rose to take leave, while Jenny, who was angry also at what she believed to be the lady’s pride, began in a flippant way to say that, poor as they were, they had some grand relatives; her oldest sister, Dorothea, had married into one of the high Scotch families, where they kept twenty servants and dined at six o’clock.

“Hoity-toity, Jenny, my lass,” said the mother, “what was the good o’ that? Dinna them foine folk turn my Dolly and her maun out o’ door and never spake to ’em till he died?”

“Yes, mother, but their boy got the money at last, and was here to see us a spell ago, lookin’ as foine as any gentleman,” Jenny said, and then having given the final twist to her hair, and seeing that their guests were really going, she woke the little Godfrey Schuyler, and took him proudly to Edith, who could and did kiss him; an act which made amends for much of her silence and seeming haughtiness of manner.

Had Edith followed out her impulse she would have kissed Abelard’s mother, for the sake of the dead son, but after her persistent silence and reserve there could be no excuse for such a proceeding, and so she merely took the withered hand in her own and pressed it hard, managing to say “good-by,” and then she passed through the low door, out into the sunshine, like one passing from prison walls into freedom again.

For a time the colonel was silent, and never spoke a word until they reached the border of the wood through which a path led to Alnwick; then, as Edith paused a moment and looked back at the thatched roof with the creeper climbing over it, he, too, looked back and said:

“I am glad my lot was not cast among such people; I cannot say they are to my taste, especially that garrulous Mrs. Nesbit, 126with her fine comb and bare arms. The old lady is better, and has a good deal of natural refinement. I think our visit did her good; such people are always pleased with attention from their betters, and it certainly does us no harm to give it. Edith, my dear——” He spoke a little sternly now, and his face was overcast. “I am sorry you chose to be so quiet and reserved. It would have pleased me better if you had made an effort to be more social with them, and I really owe them so much.”

“Oh, Howard, please forgive me. It was not pride which kept me silent. I wanted to talk, but could not,” Edith said, while the tears rained over her face.

He had made her cry, and he was sorry for it at once, and made her sit down beside him on a rude bench by the path, and said he was hasty and had expected too much from her, who could not of course sympathize with his interest in the Lyles. And Edith listened to him, and felt like a felon who is hiding his secret from the world. Why had she not told him that first day of married life with him? Why had she not shrieked it in his ear and compelled him to hear it? It had been easier then, sure, than it was now, when so much had happened to make it hard, if not impossible. Yes, impossible, she said to herself, as she remembered the bare arms and the fine comb and the talkative Mrs. Nesbit. She could not declare that woman to be her sister-in-law, and she forced the secret still further down into her heart, and when her husband bade her kiss him in token of forgiveness, she kissed him twice, and there was peace between them as they walked arm in arm through the leafy woods and grassy lanes back to their rooms at Alnwick.

But Edith’s mind was not at rest. Thoughts of that white-haired, sweet-faced old lady, knitting in the sunshine, were constantly in her mind. She had been cold, almost rude to her, and she wished to make amends,—to leave, if possible, a good impression of herself in Abelard’s old home,—to have his mother’s blessing as a guaranty of happiness in the life before her, and as she lay awake many hours of the night, her thoughts gradually formed themselves into a plan she resolved to carry out. 127Her husband had been invited to dine at the castle with a party of American gentlemen, who were about to introduce some farming implement to the agent of the estate, who acted as host on the occasion. As no ladies were included, Edith was to be left alone for several hours, and she determined to improve the opportunity for redressing any wrong she might have done to Mrs. Lyle.

It was twelve o’clock before her husband left her, and as soon as he was gone she donned her walking-dress, and set off for the cottage near the wood. Fortunately for her Mrs. Nesbit was out, but the old lady sat knitting again on the porch, with little Godfrey Schuyler playing near her on the floor. She recognized Edith, and seemed both glad and surprised to see her.

“I wanted to come again,” Edith said, sitting down close beside the woman. “I was not feeling well when I was here yesterday, and I could not talk as I wished to do, but I did not mean it for coldness or pride. Colonel Schuyler is so grateful for what your son did for him, and I—I am interested in you, too,—more even than he can be, and if you like you may tell all about your boy who died in that dreadful manner.”

There were tears in Edith’s eyes, and her voice trembled as she spoke, while Mrs. Lyle stopped her knitting and looked curiously at her. She had thought her proud and haughty, and had felt a little hurt by her silence and reserve, while her daughter, in her coarser way, had not hesitated to call her airy and an upstart, wondering who she was to feel so much above them. That she was pretty, even Jenny conceded, while the mother thought her very beautiful and grand. “Fit to be a duchess,” was her verdict now, when she saw her again so humble and sweet, apologizing for her reserve of the day before, and asking to hear about her poor dead boy. She liked to talk of him, and once launched upon the subject did not know when to stop, but talked on and on, narrating incidents of his babyhood, boyhood and early manhood, while Edith listened with hands clasped tightly together and a heart which beat almost audibly.

“And ye are goin’ where he’s buried,” Mrs. Lyle said to 128her. “And if ye want an old woman’s blessin’, maylike you’ll keep his grave fresh and clean, and send me a posy from it some day.”

“I will, I promise you I will, and if I can ever tell you about that girl who loved him, I will do so,” Edith said vehemently; and then, impelled by an impulse she could not resist, she continued: “Mrs. Lyle, I want to ask you something which you’ll please keep to yourself. You are old, and I am young; you are good, and I am not, but I want to be, so much. If there was something in your life which you supposed your husband knew, and which, after you were married, you found he did not know, though through no fault of yours, and if you felt almost sure that, had he known it, he would not have married you, and might think less of you now, would you consider it your duty to tell him?”

Edith gasped out the words and sat panting with excitement and agitation, while Mrs. Lyle considered for a moment, and then replied in the following words, which I render in good English:

“Is the something which he don’t know a sin, a crime, a wrong to him, or anybody?”

“No, not a sin, or wrong, only a mistake,” Edith replied; and the woman continued:

“Would the withholding it now do harm to any one?”

“No; on the contrary, the telling it might cause my husband to think less of me, and make us very unhappy.”

“Then if you meant no wrong, and the telling it can do no good, and might do harm, and no one is interested but yourself, keep it to yourself,” Mrs. Lyle said, while Edith felt herself growing light as air.

It was strange how much comfort she derived from Mrs. Lyle’s advice, and how much confidence she felt in the judgment of this woman, whom she had seen but once before. It was almost as if absolution had been granted her for her sins, past, present, and to come, and no religious devotee ever felt lighter and freer after a full confession than Edith did for a few moments after hearing Mrs. Lyle’s decision.

“Thank you, thank you,” she said. “You have done me so 129much good. I have been so miserable, and there was no one whom I could talk with about it. I shall not forget you, Mrs. Lyle, and sometimes I may perhaps write to you, and tell you of my home. And now I must go; but first, will you give me your blessing. I want it so much.”

And kneeling before the old lady Edith bowed her beautiful head, while a hand was laid gently on her shining hair, and a trembling voice said reverently: “Will God bless and keep my bonny child and make her a gude and happy wife, an’ gi’e her many bairns to comfort her auld age.”

She was thinking of her Abelard who died, and Edith thought of him too, and there were tears in her eyes as she rose from her knees, and, kissing the white-haired woman who had done her so much good, went out from her presence with a happier, lighter heart than she had known for many a day.

It was all right, since Abelard’s mother had said so and blessed her, and she could be happy now, and when her husband returned from the castle he met a very bright, beaming face at the door of his room, and his young wife’s arms were round his neck, and his wife herself was on his knee when she told him that she had been again to see Mrs. Lyle, and made ample amends for all yesterday’s reserve. She did not tell him of the advice or blessing, but she said:

“I know I left a good impression, and I promised to write to her some time and tell her of my home. She seems a very nice old lady.”

Col. Schuyler kissed her glowing cheek and called her a conscientious little puss, and thought how very beautiful she was in her pretty evening dress, with the wild flowers in her hair, and felt himself the most fortunate man in England to possess so much youth and beauty.

A few days later found them again at Oakwood, where Godfrey met them at the station and saluted Edith as his “mamma,” while his eyes danced with mischief and fun. He did not tell her of the letter of dismay which had come to him from home in answer to his own, wherein the charms of the new mother had been so graphically described. But he laughed to 130himself every time he thought of it, and what they were prepared for, and then thought of the rare type of loveliness whom he teasingly called mamma, and to whom he was as attentive as if he had been her lover instead of her step-son. Robert Macpherson was still at Oakwood, and greatly to Godfrey’s delight had decided upon going to America. “The very nicest chap in the world,” Godfrey still continued to think him, in spite of the hair parted in the middle, and the night-shirts ruffled and buttoned behind.

“But something has come over the spirit of his dream,” he said to Edith, when talking of him. “Ever since he came from visiting those friends of his he has fits of melancholy and acts a good deal like a man in love, but when I put it to him he denied it indignantly, and said no girl whom he would have would ever marry him, and then he went straight off to see the little Westbrooke who threw you that bouquet, you know. He is wonderfully struck with her, and wants to paint her portrait as a fancy piece, and call it ‘La petite sœur;’ but that Rogers dame guards her pet like an old she-dragon, and will not let Gertie sit on any account, even though I promised to be present at the sittings and see that fair play was done.”

Edith smiled derisively, and felt that she did not blame Mrs. Rogers for objecting to Godfrey Schuyler, with his saucy eyes and teasing ways, as a protector for her child. The little girl was going out with them, Godfrey said, and maybe Bob could study her a little on the ship. He had made two or three sketches of her already, drawing from his memory, of course, but none of them quite suited him. He must have her sit to him, and he,—Godfrey,—thought it a shame for that Rogers woman to be so much afraid of having her protégée looked at by such nice chaps as himself and Bob!

Edith had never fairly seen the child whom Robert Macpherson desired as a model for “La Sœur,” but she felt a deep interest in her, both for the blessing sent on her bridal day, and because of the strong affection the child had inspired in Mrs. Barrett, who seemed to feel worse at the thought of parting with her than with Edith herself.

131The first meeting between mother and daughter had been rather cool and constrained, for Edith had lost confidence in her parent’s integrity, and could not help showing it. Still she was about to leave her, and at the last, when she went to say good-by, her manner softened greatly, for in spite of all it was her mother whom she kissed with many tears, and who herself broke down and cried, when the last farewell was said, and Edith went from her door forever. But Mrs. Barrett did not sob as pitifully then as when an hour later Gertie Westbrooke came and hung about her neck so lovingly, and said:

“I am sorry to leave you alone. I wish you would go too.”

Edith had not said that; Edith did not wish it, and Mrs. Barrett knew why, but it hurt her none the less, and Gertie’s fond regrets and words of love were very dear to her.

“I shall never forget you, never; and, maybe, if I am ever married, you shall live with me, and be my grandma,” Gertie said, with a dim perception that her friend’s heart was sore with a longing to go with her daughter, who did not want her; and then Mrs. Barrett sobbed aloud, and held the girl close to her bosom, and said:

“I never thought I could love a child as I love you, little Gertie. I am a hard, wicked woman, no doubt, but I want you to be good, and surely I may pray for that. God bless you, Gertie, and make your life as happy as you are sweet and pure. Good-by.”

She put the child gently from her, and went quickly into her own room, where she could be alone, and I am almost certain that the parting with her daughter did not hurt her half as much as the parting with Gertie Westbrooke.

132
CHAPTER XX.
ON THE SEA.

hey had been at sea three days, and Edith in her warm wraps and pretty hood was sitting on deck in the large easy-chair her husband had bought in Liverpool for this purpose. Every comfort which ingenuity could devise and money pay for he had procured for her in order to make the voyage bearable. One of the largest, most commodious staterooms was hers, so that she need not feel too much confined, and when all this did not avail to avert the evils of sea-sickness, he and Norah nursed her assiduously, until she was able to be lifted in his arms and carried upon deck, where, with the fresh breeze blowing in her face, she felt her strength coming back, and thoroughly enjoyed the blue expanse of sky above, and the deep, dark waters beneath, which now were smooth and quiet as a river. The colonel was never sick, and walked the planks from first to last as firmly and steadily as a general at the head of his troops; but alas for poor Godfrey. During the voyage out he had been perfectly well, even in a storm, and boasted much of his ability to keep so.

“You have only to exercise your will and you are well enough,” he said, with a certain sniff of contempt for the weaker ones who are never seen from port to port. “Pluck is all you need to keep you straight, even when chairs and tables and shovel and tongs are dancing a cotillon, and raising Ned generally.”

This was Godfrey’s opinion, when in his clean, light summer suit he stepped airily on board and gave his hand to Bob Macpherson, even then growing pale about the lips and unsteady in his feet. But when they had been out a few hours, and a great lurch came, and the waves broke over the deck, and splashed Godfrey’s clean pants, and dashed the salt spray in his face, he, too, began to turn white, and feel, as he expressed it, as if the ends of his toes were coming up through his stomach 133to pay his throat a visit, and when the toes reached there and showed signs of going still further, the young man succumbed to his fate, and suddenly disappearing from view, went headlong into the room where poor Bob had lain from the first, caring little whether his perfumed hair was parted in the middle or not, or his elaborate night-shirt buttoned before or behind. Personal appearance was nothing in that stateroom where the two young men lay, one in the upper, one in the under berth, and both too sick for more exertion than to groan, when a swell, heavier than usual, sent them rolling on the floor. Regularly each morning Dan went in to see how it fared with them, offering chicken-broth and coffee, and bidding them “keep up their courage and have a little pluck; it was nothing to what it would be.”

To these consolatory remarks Bob offered no response. He was too nearly crushed to speak, and afraid, withal, to do so, as the least movement raised a tornado in his stomach; but Godfrey was more demonstrative, and having plunged into bed in his boots, which he had succeeded in getting off and had beside him, he hurled one at the head of poor Dan, who adroitly dodged it and then graciously adjusted the spittoon, knowing it would be needed after such exertion. And it was!

“Talk to me of pluck!” Godfrey said, between the upheavings which nearly burst his throat; “I believe my soul I’m throwing mine up!” and then he lay back upon his pillow, white, quivering and subdued, and took a swallow of the broth and declared it was made of dishwater, and bade Dan clear out and never show himself there again.

Regularly, twice each day, the colonel visited his son, and made set speeches to him, and bade him try to dress himself and get on deck, where the air would soon restore him.

“Mrs. Schuyler is there, and nearly well, and she was as bad as you, and worse, for she could not flounce as you do. A little effort of the will is all that is necessary to set you on your legs.”

Unconsciously, he was quoting Godfrey’s own words, and poor Bob ventured a little chuckle, which he paid for afterward, 134while Godfrey wished there was no such commandment as the third, so that he might free his mind for once.

And how, these days, had it fared with little Gertie, the second-class passenger, whose stateroom was small and close and hot, for the window had been closed and fastened since the water came in with a dash and wet the little hard bed. Poor Gertie, how the ship tumbled and rolled and tossed, and how she tossed and rolled and tumbled with it, and clutched at everything in her reach, with a feeling that they were tipping over and she was standing on her head. And how the cold, clammy sweat stood on her face and hands, and the dreadful, death-like faintness crept from her feet through every nerve, as, with fearful contortions, her stomach tried in vain to relieve itself, and she fell back, panting and helpless, upon the hard, scant pillow. It was horrible, and the poor child wished so much that she could die, or that the ship would stop for just one minute, and give her time to breathe, even though it were the fetid air, which almost stifled her and made her long so for the hedge-rows and fields of dear old England, now so far away. But Gertie did not die, and the vessel did not stop, and the window was not opened. She was merely second-class, and it was not worth one’s while to open and shut windows just for her; and though Mary Rogers did all she could for her sick child, and brought her many things to tempt her appetite, Gertie turned from them all, and sobbed piteously, “I am so sick,—shall we ever get there? Is everybody sick, and are all the rooms as close and hot and small? Where is the pretty lady, Mrs. Schuyler? I wish she’d come and see me. I think I should be better. Would you dare ask her?”

Mrs. Rogers did not know whether she dared or not. She would see, she said, and when that afternoon she saw Edith on deck, she ventured upon some trivial remark as the cousin of Norah, and finally spoke of her little girl, who was suffering so much.

“Oh yes; Gertie Westbrooke. I remember now. She was to go with us; and you are Mrs. Rogers, Norah’s cousin, and the little girl is very sick and uncomfortable; I am so sorry 135for her. I know just how it feels. Can I do anything for her?”

Mary hesitated and then said:

“She has felt interested in you since the day you were married. She was there.”

“Yes, and threw me the pretty bouquet,” Edith said; and Mary continued:

“She talks a great deal of you, and thinks now if you could come and see her it would do her good; but, ma’am, I told her how it wasn’t likely you would or could do that. Our room is very small and close, and the pillows are so hard and poor.”

“I do not believe I can go now; I am hardly strong enough,” Edith said; “but I will come some day if she does not get well; and now carry her this soft shawl; it will answer for a pillow. I do not need it at all, and Norah shall take her some oranges and wine.”

Mary demurred at the shawl, but Edith insisted, and remembered the oranges and wine, which so refreshed the child that she slept soundly that night with Edith’s shawl for a pillow, and a dream of Edith in her heart.

The next day she was better, and Mary took the shawl back to Edith, who was again on deck, with her husband standing beside her.

“Poor thing,” Edith said, kindly; “I am glad she is better. Tell her I’ll come and see her when I can, and as soon as she is able to be moved I’ll have her brought up to my stateroom for a while; it must be dreadful there with the windows shut and the air so close and confined.”

She glanced at her husband, whose face was overcast.

“Who is this woman and who is the child you propose moving into our stateroom?” he asked, stiffly, when Mary was gone; and Edith replied by telling him what she knew of Gertie Westbrooke and her mother.

Colonel Schuyler could reproach Edith for seeming cold and proud toward the Lyles, to whom he felt that he owed something, but he was far from wishing her to treat people like 136Mary Rogers with any show of familiarity. There his pride came in strongly, and he said to her at once:

“You can send the child any delicacy you choose, and I will see that her window is opened so she can have air, but she must not be brought to our stateroom; and if she slept on your shawl, as it seems she did, I desire you to give it to her altogether. You surely will never wear it again. Norah?” And he turned to their maid, who stood near:

“Take this shawl to your cousin’s child and tell her Mrs. Schuyler sent it, and wishes her to keep it.”

Norah looked wonderingly at him, while Edith blushed painfully, but neither said a word, and after Norah was gone with the shawl Colonel Schuyler continued: “I do not wish to distress you, my dear, or to interfere with your actions unnecessarily, but I think it just as well not to have too much to do with the lower class unless, as in the case of the Lyles, we are under obligations to them. And as this Rogers child is nothing to us, you are not called upon to visit her. She will soon recover. Such people always do. I’ll go now and speak about the window.”

He felt uncomfortable and wished to get away, for he did not quite like the grieved look in Edith’s eyes, or the pained expression of her face. Edith herself could not tell why his words hurt her as they did, or why she felt so interested in the sick girl whom she had as yet never seen distinctly. But she was interested in her, and though she did not visit her as she had intended doing, she sent her many delicacies and a pillow from her stateroom, and felt almost as much pleased as Mary Rogers herself when she heard at last that she was better.

Gertie had been very sick, and her bright color was all gone, and her round cheeks looked thin and wan, when at last Mary dressed her in her warm wrapper, with its facings of pink, and then folding Edith’s shawl about her carried her on deck, and propping her up with pillows and cushions made her as comfortable as she could.

Though pale and worn with marks of suffering on her face and in her soft blue eyes, Gertie was pretty still, and made a 137very attractive picture as she sat in her quiet corner with a book, whose pages she was turning listlessly, when she heard footsteps approaching her, and a voice exclaimed:

“Hallo, Bob, by George, if there isn’t ‘La Sœur,’ looking like a little ghost; here, this way;” and Godfrey Schuyler, who was also better and able to be up, came quickly to her side, followed by Robert Macpherson, who moved more slowly and showed more signs of weakness than the active, restless Godfrey.

Robert Macpherson had seen and talked with Gertie at her lodgings near Oakwood, and had asked her to sit for her picture, and she had said she would, and a day had been appointed for the sitting, when Mary Rogers interfered and refused in toto, and kept her child so close that neither Robert nor Godfrey saw her again except in her aunt’s company or through the window of her room.

Godfrey, indeed, had only spoken to her once, and that when she sat in the door eating blackberries, her lips and pretty fingers stained with the juice, and her bright hair falling about her face. Mrs. Rogers had come upon him then just as he was going to make some flattering speech, and called her little girl away, and he had not seen her since until now, when he esteemed it a great piece of luck to stumble thus upon her with the dragon out of sight. Gertie knew him, and a pleased smile broke over her face and shone in her eyes, when he stopped before her and asked if she had been sick and how she liked the feeling of it. She did not like it at all, and she and Godfrey grew very social and sympathetic as they compared notes, he going far ahead of her, of course, inasmuch as he did not hesitate to draw upon his imagination when necessary, while she adhered strictly to the truth, saying only that she felt at times as if she were standing on her head, while he averred that he did stand on his head until he was black in the face. She did not believe him, but she laughed merrily at his droll sayings, and then acquaintance was progressing rapidly when he asked what she was reading, and stooped down beside her to see the title-page.

Godfrey was very fond of little girls, and this one had interested him greatly from the time he first saw her in the cab on 138Caledonia Street, and now as he bent his face so close to hers that his brown curls touched her auburn hair, he could not resist the temptation, but snatched a kiss from her lips ere she was aware of his intention. Though small of stature Gertie was twelve years old, and very womanly in some respects, and at this liberty all her instincts of modesty and propriety awoke within her, and while the hot tears glittered in her eyes, which flashed angrily upon the offender, she said:

“You stop! You mustn’t! You shan’t! You have no business to kiss me, Mr. Godfrey, and I am very indignant!”

She wiped her lips two or three times, while Godfrey, who considered it a good joke, and was vastly amused at her rage, said to her:

“Why oughtn’t I to kiss a pretty girl like you when I find her all alone?”

“Because I am alone,” Gertie replied, with a very wise shake of the head. “Because men like you shouldn’t kiss girls like me whom they don’t like.”

“But I do like you immensely,” Godfrey said, “and think you the prettiest girl I ever saw.”

“Hush!” Gertie rejoined, with all the dignity of a woman of twenty. “You shall not talk to me like that, and you wouldn’t either if I was somebody else.”

“Who, for instance?” Godfrey asked, and looking him steadily in the face, with her clear, honest eyes, Gertie said:

“Mr. Godfrey, if I were one of your sisters would you have done it?”

“Certainly, I have a right to kiss my sister,” Godfrey said, and Gertie continued:

“I don’t mean that. I mean if you were somebody else and I was one of your sisters.”

“Still wrong,” Godfrey said, “for even if I were somebody else and you my sister I would kiss you many times.”

He would not understand, and Gertie glanced appealingly at Robert Macpherson, who had been listening languidly, while with an artist’s interest he attentively studied the little face 139which so puzzled and attracted him. As he met her glance he came a step nearer to her, and said:

“Let me tell you how to put it. Suppose you are my sister?”

“You are a gentleman born?” Gertie asked, while the young man colored to the roots of his hair, and answered:

“I believe I am.”

“Well, then,” and she turned again to Godfrey, “suppose I was his sister and you were yourself, and you found me a sick, tired little girl, sitting by myself, would you have dared to kiss me then?”

There was in her manner so much sweetness and dignity withal that languid Bob roused in her behalf, and said:

“If he did I’d knock him down,” while Godfrey, wholly driven to bay, answered humbly:

“No, Miss Gertie, I would not, and I beg your pardon, and assure you I meant no harm, but really you looked so pretty, so piquante——”

“You must not tell me that either,” Gertie said. “I’m glad if you think me pretty, and glad to have you like me, but you mustn’t tell me so. It’s very bad, for Auntie Rogers says young men like you never talk to girls like me for good, and I must not let you.”

“What kind of a girl are you, pray?” Godfrey asked, feeling more and more amused and interested with this quaint little creature, who replied:

“I am poor, and have not any relatives except a grandmother, and I don’t know where she is. But my mother was a lady, auntie says, and I once lived in a big house with servants, and auntie was my nurse. I don’t know where it was or why I left it when mother died. Auntie does not tell me, and she is so kind, and I have forty pounds a year of my own, and maybe I shall learn a trade, or teach school in America, and some time marry respectably, but I’m not the kind of girl for a man like you to kiss and talk to.”

“Gertie, you are a brick!” came emphatically from the amused Godfrey, who felt a great desire to kiss the full lips again in his admiration of the child.

140But he dared not do it. Indeed, there was something about her which inspired him with a respect such as he had never before felt for a girl, and as he told Robert Macpherson in confidence, he wanted to crawl into his boots when, after his assertion that she was a brick, she lifted her eyes so wonderingly, and said:

“I’m a what?”

“A brick,” he answered; “don’t you know what that is?”

“Yes, I know it in its place; but I don’t know what you mean when you give the name to me. Nothing bad, I hope.”

“Certainly not; it’s a compliment. I called you so because I like you and think you smart,—clever, you English would say, I suppose.”

And Godfrey began to shake down his pants, and stand first on one foot and then upon the other, in his perplexity how to appear well in the mind of this little girl, who was so young, and innocent, and honest, and yet so old in some things.

“That’s slang, isn’t it?” Gertie asked.

And he replied:

“Yes, I suppose it would be called so, but it is very expressive. Don’t you like slang?”

“No, I do not, and I don’t see why nice people like you should use it so much.”

“Do I use it so much?” Godfrey asked.

And the girl replied:

“I heard you once at Oakwood, when you did not know I was there in the kitchen, say ‘by George,’ and ‘by Jove,’ three times right along, and you called your father the ‘governor,’ and one of the maids said she supposed it was Yankee slang.”

Godfrey’s face was scarlet at this reproof, which he knew he merited, and for a moment he did not know what to say. Soon rallying, however, he said, good-naturedly:

“I guess I am rather given to slang,—the girls at home nag me about it all the time, and I do it to tease them; but I’ll quit it now, by Jo—I beg your pardon. I did not know I was so given to it, and I will reform, by George! There! that was to finish up.”

141And Godfrey laughed heartily at himself, while Gertie, too, joined in the laugh, and thought how handsome he was, and what white, even teeth he had, and hoped he was not angry with her. So when he said to her next: “Gertie, if I really try to reform and quit my slang, will you promise to like me a little?” she answered quickly: “Yes, and I like you now,—some, you know,—though I did not like you to stare at me so when I was in the cab at Mrs. Barrett’s gate; but when I saw you in church at the wedding, I thought you very nice, and kept on thinking so until you kissed me, when I was very angry; but I’m over it now, and you’ll never kiss me again.”

That was a fixed fact in her mind, but Godfrey was not so sure of it, and he said to her seriously:

“Gertie, I am sure you are very good and generous, and I really mean to reform, and I want you to promise me one thing. You are going to Hampstead, I believe?”

Yes, Gertie supposed she was, “but,” she added, “I shall not see you, of course.”

“Why not?” he asked, and she replied:

“Why, don’t you know? You are rich and we are poor. You live in the great house, and we are your tenants; that is, I believe auntie is to rent a cottage of your father, if it is not too high. We cannot give much, for auntie lost her shares in the bank last summer, and now she must do fluting and clear-starching and sewing for our living, as she will not touch my forty pounds; that she says is for my education, and I do so want to learn music. We can live on most nothing, only the rent takes money. Will it be very much?”

“No, not much,” Godfrey replied, a sudden thought flashing into his mind upon which he resolved to act, but not till he had made his compact with Gertie.

“You did not let me finish,” he said; “I want to make a bargain with you, which is this: I am to reform, and you are to tell me from time to time if I am improving, and when you really think I am a perfect gentleman, you are to let me kiss you again. Is it a fair bargain?”

142Gertie considered a moment, and then said, with the utmost gravity:

“Ye-es,—I don’t believe there would be any harm in it, inasmuch as you did it for pay.”

“Then it is a bargain, and I begin from this minute to be a gentleman,” Godfrey cried, but his zeal was a little dampened by Gertie’s next remark.

“It may be a long time, Mr. Godfrey, and I’ll be grown up, and then it would not be proper at all.”

Here Robert Macpherson burst into a loud laugh and exclaimed:

“Better give it up, Schuyler; the child is too much for you.”

But Godfrey was not inclined to give it up, and said:

“A bargain is a bargain, Miss Gertie, and I shall claim my reward if it is not until you are a hundred. How old are you, little one?”

“Twelve going on thirteen. How old are you?”

“Eighteen, going on nineteen,” was Godfrey’s answer, and as he just then saw his father in a distant part of the vessel, he touched his hat and walked away to set in train the plan he had in his mind for benefiting Gertie Westbrooke.

She interested him greatly, and he wished to do her good, and joining his father, he said:

“By the way, father, have you decided which house you will rent to Mrs. Rogers?”

“Rent to whom?” Colonel Schuyler asked. “Who is Mrs. Rogers?”

He had forgotten her for the moment, but when Godfrey explained that she was Norah’s cousin, he remembered that something had been said about her having one of his cottages, but he had not decided which one. Why, what did it matter to Godfrey?

“It matters this,” Godfrey said. “You know my house, which you gave me for my own. Perry wrote me a few days before we sailed that the tenant had left it suddenly, and there was no one in it. Now, if you don’t mind, I’d like to let it to Mrs. Rogers.”

143“Certainly, let it to her if you like,” the colonel said, pleased to see in his son what he thought a business proclivity, and a wish to make the most of his property.

He little guessed that it was Godfrey’s interest in Gertie which prompted him to wish to see her in his own cottage, the best by far of all the houses known as the Schuyler tenements. It was not new like many of them, but it was very commodious and pretty, with a wealth of vines creeping over the porch, a rose tree near the door, from which Edith herself had plucked the sweet blossoms, and twined them in her hair, for Godfrey’s cottage was the very house where Mrs. Fordham once lived, and from which Abelard Lyle was carried to the grave. And Gertie Westbrooke was going there, and Godfrey was already thinking how, as soon as he reached New York, he would telegraph to Perry to have the house cleaned throughout and put in perfect repair for his new tenants.

Meantime Robert Macpherson was puzzling himself over Gertie’s face and its resemblance to another.

“How can they be so like, and yet nothing to each other?” he said, and once, when an opportunity occurred, he questioned the child closely with regard to her antecedents, but elicited little more information than she had already given Godfrey in his hearing.

“She was Gertie Westbrooke, born in London, January —, 18—. She had lived for a while in a big house, with her mother, whom she could just remember, and who died when she was two years old, and then a new mother came, who was very cross, and Mary Rogers, her nurse, took her away, and had been so good to her ever since.”

“And your father?” Robert asked. “Where is he? Do you never see him?”

“He was cross, too, and drank too much wine,” Gertie said; “and auntie says he’s dead, and I guess I hain’t any relatives now, but a grandmother, and I don’t know where she is. I heard auntie tell a woman once that I had a history stranger than a story-book, but when I asked her about it she looked cross, and bade me never listen, and said if there was anything 144I ought to know, she would surely tell me. Sometimes when I see grand people, I think, maybe, I am one of them, for I feel just as they act, and could act just like them, if I tried.”

“Maybe you are a princess in disguise,” Robert said, laying his hand kindly on the bright flowing hair. “Gertie, do you know you are the very image of the only sister I ever had? Dorothea was the name, but I called her Dora, and loved her so much.”

“And she died?” Gertie said, guessing the fact from the tremor in the young man’s voice and the moisture in his eyes.

“Yes, she died, and I have no picture of her, and that is why I wanted you to sit for me. You are so much like her. Maybe if you tell your aunt the reason she will allow it when we reach America. I am going to Hampstead, too, for a time, to visit Mr. Godfrey. Will you speak to her about it?”

Gertie promised that she would, and kept her word, and Mrs. Rogers said she would see, which Gertie took as an affirmative reply and reported to the young man, telling him, too, that auntie had forbidden her to talk much with him, and telling Godfrey that he must not come where she was, for auntie did not like it, and said it was “no good.”

“And I didn’t tell her, either, that you kissed me; if I had, she would have been angry, and maybe shut me up in that close, dark stateroom; but you are never to do it again.”

“No, not till you say you think me a perfect gentleman; then I shall claim my reward,” Godfrey said, laughingly, and as Mary Rogers appeared in view, with the look of a termagant on her face, he turned his back on Gertie and pretended to be very intent upon a sail just appearing in the distant horizon.

145
CHAPTER XXI.
THE LADIES AT SCHUYLER HILL.

iss Christine Rossiter, aged 46; Miss Alice Creighton, aged 17; Miss Julia Schuyler, aged 16; and Miss Emma, aged 14. These were the ladies who, a good portion of the year, were domesticated at Schuyler Hill, and of whom I will speak in order; and first of Miss Rossiter, whose personal appearance and peculiarities Godfrey had of course exaggerated when he talked of her to Edith. She was his mother’s sister, and forty-six, and had once been engaged to a young man who left her all his money, and for whom she wore black half a dozen years, during which time she gave herself to the church, and went so far as to think of turning Romanist, and hiding her grief in a convent. But she recovered from that, and being good-looking, and only thirty, with a fortune of half a million, she went back to the world again, and became a belle, for she was a handsome woman still, and at times exceedingly brilliant and witty, the result, it was whispered at last, of opium-eating in secret. This habit she had contracted during her seclusion, with a view to deaden her grief, and make her sleep at night. And after the grief was over the habit remained, and grew upon her constantly, until now she was never without her vial of the deadly stuff, and her nerves were completely shattered with the poison.

Exceedingly proud and exclusive, she held herself above the most of her acquaintances, and made them feel that she did, and still exercised over them an influence which would draw every one of them to her side when she wished them to come.

Few women understood the art of dressing better than she did, and when arrayed in evening costume, with her diamonds and her lace, she was still a very handsome and attractive woman, capable of entertaining a roomful of guests, and keeping them delighted with her ready wit and brilliant repartees. She should never marry, she said, and yet more than Godfrey believed 146that she had no objection to becoming Mrs. Schuyler second, if only she were asked to do so. Since her sister’s death she had spent most of her time at the Hill, giving as an excuse that “Emily’s children needed a mother’s care so badly,” while Howard was always happier to have her there.

Of this last there might have been two opinions, but the colonel was a peaceable man, and always made her welcome, and humored her whims and listened to her advice when he chose to do so, and offered no remonstrance when she appropriated to herself the very best and pleasantest room in the house, the one with the bay-window overlooking the river and the mountains, and which, as it chanced to be in the south wing, was one of the suite intended for Edith, and which she surrendered, with what reluctance we shall see hereafter.

Alice Creighton was Col. Schuyler’s ward and the niece of the wife of Mrs. Schuyler’s half brother, the Rev. John Calvert, who lived in New York, and whose house was properly her home, though she spent much of her time at Schuyler Hill, where her education was progressing under the direction of Miss Browning, the governess. Short, fat, and chubby, with light hair and eyes and complexion, and a nose that turned up decidedly, she was not very pretty, save as young, happy girlhood is always pretty, but she was very stylish, which answered instead of beauty, and made her remarked wherever she went. Whatever was fashionable she wore in the extreme, and at the little church in Hampstead there was on Sundays a great deal of curiosity among the village girls to see the last new style, as represented by Miss Creighton. And after they saw it they copied it as far as was possible, and then found to their surprise that what they had adopted as the latest in the beau-monde, was laid aside for something later by their mirror of fashion.

She expected to marry Godfrey, for the arrangement had been settled between her father, before he died, and Col. Howard Schuyler; and Alice acquiesced in it, and looked confidently forward to a time when she would have a house of her own and furnish it as no house in New York had ever yet been furnished, and keep seven servants at least, with horses and carriages, and 147nothing to do from morning till night but enjoy herself, and be envied in doing it. To all this grandeur Godfrey would be a very proper appendage. He was good-looking, and came from a family superior even to her own; he could be a gentleman when he chose, and would look very nicely beside her in the Park and at the opera, and when she entered the drawing-rooms on Fifth Avenue on some festive occasion.

This was Miss Alice Creighton, as nearly as I can daguerreotype her at the time of which I write, while Julia Schuyler was much like her in disposition, but different in looks.

Julia was tall and slender, and a brunette, with clear, olive complexion, high color, sparkling black eyes, and a quantity of glossy, black hair, of which she was very proud, and which she usually wore becomingly, let the fashion be what it might. Some people called her beautiful, but that she could never be with her wide mouth and large ears, but she certainly was handsome and bright, and could, if she chose, be very agreeable and fascinating, but, except with her equals, she did not often choose, and was known in town as a proud, haughty girl, caring only for herself and the few favored ones belonging to her circle. And yet she taught in Sunday-school, and made dresses and aprons for the poor, and esteemed herself almost a saint, because she once carried with her own hands a dish of soup to poor, old, bedridden Mrs. Vandeusenhisen, whose grandchild was called for Alice at the instigation of the mischievous Godfrey.

Both Julia and Alice went sometimes on errands of mercy, and wore gray cloaks with scarlet facings to the cape, and felt themselves on a par with the sisters of charity, and had a lump of camphor in their pockets to prevent contagion, and asked the little ones if they knew the Creed, and the Lord’s Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, affecting great surprise if they did not, and telling them if they did that they ought to be confirmed at once and grow up respectable citizens.

Very different from these young ladies was pale-faced, quiet Emma, who believed everybody to be what he seemed, and wished herself as good as Alice and Julia, who were so devout 148at church, and who read a long chapter every morning and a short psalm every night. Emma did not like to read the Bible, and always glanced ahead to see how long the chapter was, and felt glad when it was ended. And she did not like to visit the poor because as a general thing the close air of the rooms made her sick, and she was always unhappy for a whole day with thinking about them and fancying how she would feel were she also poor.

And yet of the three girls I liked Emma best, for I knew just how true, and honest, and innocent she was, and that though she too was proud, she tried to overcome her pride, because she thought it wrong, and in her heart had a sincere desire to do just what was right. No one ever called Emma handsome; her features were too sharp for that, but there was something in her smile and the expression of her soft, dark eyes which made her very attractive, and, as I thought, prettier than Julia herself.

Take them altogether the ladies at Schuyler Hill were quite distingué in manner and appearance, and we were rather proud to have them with us, for their presence added something of importance to our little town, and gave a certain éclat to our society. Nor was their governess, Miss Helen Browning, much behind in style and personal appearance. Indeed, she prided herself upon manner and good breeding, and knew every point of etiquette, from sitting bolt-upright in her chair, with just the two tips of her boots visible, to eating soup with the side of her spoon, and never on any account allowing her hands to touch the table.

And now, last of all, comes Mrs. Tiffe, the housekeeper, a dignified, energetic woman of fifty, who wore black silk every day, with pink ribbons in her cap, and who, after several hard-fought battles with Miss Rossiter for the supremacy, had come off victorious, and reigned triumphant at Schuyler Hill, where she feared no one save the colonel himself, and liked no one but Godfrey. He was her idol, and he alone could unlock the mysterious closet under the stairs, and call forth jam, and jelly, and even marmalade, if he liked. Such lunches as she gave the ladies when they were alone, and Godfrey not there to coax, 149or the colonel to insist! A chicken wing and back, with a slice of bread and butter, and possibly a baked apple, if there chanced to be any “standing round” in danger of spoiling; while her breakfasts were delicate and dainty enough for a fairy, or the worst form which dyspepsia ever assumed. “Frugal repasts,” Godfrey called them; but for their frugality Mrs. Tiffe made amends at dinner, which was served with great profusion, and all the elegance the house could command. Nothing was too nice for dinner; and Mrs. Tiffe, felt her heart swell with pride when she saw her ladies, handsomely dressed, filing into the spacious dining-room, where the table was bright with silver and flowers. To her the Schuylers and Rossiters represented the world, and anybody outside that world, unless it were Miss Creighton, was looked upon with disgust, and barely tolerated. Miss Christine, it is true, was not a favorite, but she was a Rossiter, and Mrs. Tiffe charged all her faults to the fact that “she was an old maid, and couldn’t help being queer,” and so endured her quietly when her own wishes were not opposed.

And this was the household into which the news of Col. Schuyler’s second marriage fell like a bombshell in the enemy’s camp, wounding each one, and wringing from each one a cry according to her disposition. But for a description of this I must take a fresh sheet and begin another chapter.

CHAPTER XXII.
THE NEWS AT SCHUYLER HILL.

t came to them one sultry August morning, when the thermometer was 90 degrees in the shade, and the air was like a furnace even before nine o’clock. Breakfast was very late that morning, and Mrs. Tiffe was furious. She had committed the extravagance of broiled chicken and muffins, which of course were spoiled, and she had herself been up since four o’clock and was in a melting condition, in spite of the thinnest muslin she could find and the coolest 150garments she could wear. Miss Rossiter had not slept well, and, as was her custom after a restless night, she loitered in bed, and dawdled over her toilet and bath, and took so much time in dressing, that the clock was striking nine when she at last entered the dining-room, followed by the three girls and their governess, all panting and inveighing against the weather, except Emma. She liked it. Naturally chilly and cold, the heat suited her, and her face alone was pleasant and contented as she took her seat at the table and attacked the cold chicken and half-warm, heavy muffins, which her dyspeptic aunt could not eat.

“Bring me a slice of dry toast,” Miss Rossiter said to Martha, the waitress, who, on returning with the toast, brought two letters for Miss Julia, bearing foreign post-marks.

“From father and Godfrey,” Julia said. “Excuse me, please, while I read them.”

Leaning back in her chair she broke the seal of her father’s first and read a few lines, then with a start which nearly upset her cup of chocolate, she exclaimed:

“Oh, horrible, girls! Aunt Christine, listen,—father——”

“Martha, you can go, now,” she said suddenly, remembering the girl, who departed to the kitchen, where the news was already known, and where the servants stood open-mouthed around Perry, who was reading the letter his master had sent to him.

“What is it, Julia?” Miss Rossiter asked, when Martha was gone, and Julia, whose eyes had run at lightning speed over the contents of the letter, replied:

“Father is going to be married to a Miss Edith Lyle, Aunt Sinclair’s hired companion. You remember he mentioned her once before as living at Oakwood. Hear what he says of her: ‘She is a lady of good family, the daughter of a clergyman, the friend and companion of my deceased sister, your late Aunt Sinclair. She possesses many accomplishments, and is what I consider a very remarkable personage.’ (How like father that sounds!) ‘And I expect that all due deference will be paid to her by every member of my household.’ (He has underscored 151that.) ‘Please break the news to your Aunt Christine, and tell Mrs. Tiffe to see that all the rooms in the south wing are made ready for Mrs. Schuyler. I have written to Perry about refurnishing them, but Tiffe must superintend it a little——’

“Oh, dreadful, I believe I am going to faint,—my hartshorn, Emma, please,” Miss Rossiter gasped.

The hartshorn was found, and two palm-leaf fans were brought into requisition, and then Miss Rossiter spoke again, this time hysterically and in tears.

“My poor sister, to be so insulted! A hired companion! and she was a Rossiter! Oh, I cannot bear it, my poor disgraced nieces, my heart is breaking for you.”

“But, Aunt Christine, he says she is a lady, the daughter of a clergyman,” Emma said, soothingly,—hers the only voice raised in defence of the intruder,—the interloper,—the adventuress,—as Miss Rossiter termed the expected bride.

Emma’s heart had throbbed painfully at the thought of a new mother, but it was natural for her to defend whatever she believed abused, and she spoke up for the unknown Edith, until Julia, who had been reading Godfrey’s letter, uttered a cry of bitter anger and scorn, and said, sternly:

“Hush, Em, you don’t know what you are talking about; a lady, indeed, and the daughter of a clergyman! A woman of forty, with a limp, and glass eye, and cracked voice, is a nice mother to bring us!”

“A wha-at?” Miss Rossiter gasped, while Alice and Emma both exclaimed simultaneously: “A limp and a glass eye! What do you mean? Let me see;” and looking over Julia’s shoulder Alice read aloud what Godfrey had written.

Godfrey had said, “The sight of her will take your breath away,” and in fact the very thought of her did that, and for full a minute after the letter was read there was not a sound heard in the room where the indignant and confounded ladies sat, each staring blankly at the other, and neither able to speak or move. Miss Rossiter was the first to stir, and with a moaning cry, “I cannot bear it,” she went into violent hysterics, and 152Martha was called in, and the poor lady was taken to her room, where she tried, one after another, every bottle of medicine in her closet, but to no effect; even the Crown Bitters failed, and she sank upon the bed, shivering with cold, and asking for shawls and blankets on that August day, with a temperature of ninety degrees in the shade.

Perhaps Miss Rossiter herself had not been aware how much Colonel Howard was to her, or how hard it would be to see another woman there in her sister’s place. She had too much sense to believe she would ever fill it, yet the first smart had been that of disappointment and a sense of wrong to herself, while the second was a keen pang of mortification and anger, that if he must choose another he had chosen that caricature on womanhood described so graphically by Godfrey. It is true she did not quite believe him literally. Neither did his sisters, who sat in the library with white faces and tearful eyes. Julia was wrathful and defiant, and was already in a state of fierce rebellion against the woman of forty with the crack in her voice. So much she believed, but the limp and glass eye were too thoroughly Godfrey’s to be trusted.

“Probably the woman is lame and wears glasses,” she said, when she could trust herself to speak at all, “and perhaps she squints, but I have no faith in the glass eye. Godfrey made that up. Father is not the man to marry such a monster, and then expect us to pay all due deference to her. The idea of my deferring to such a woman. I hate her. I’ll poison her, the wretch!”

Julia Schuyler was terrible in her wrath, and with that expression in her flashing eyes and about the white quivering lips, she looked equal to anything, and Edith might well have trembled could she have seen the dark-faced girl, who, with clenched fists, threatened to poison her. Julia would not of course acknowledge that she really had murder in her heart, but she felt outraged, and insulted, and disgraced, and as if she must do something to avert the horrible evil threatening them all. But what could she do? To oppose her will to her father’s was like trying to move a mountain of stone with her puny strength. The mountain 153would not be hurt, and only she would suffer from the attempt.

There was no help, no hope, and when her anger had spent itself she burst into tears and sobbed passionately, just as Emma had done from the first, but with this difference, she cried from wrath and indignant mortification, while Emma’s tears were more for the dead mother whose place was to be filled, and whose death it seemed to her now had only been yesterday.

The governess, who knew that remark of any kind from herself would be resented as impertinent, wisely said nothing, while Alice, too, was silent, except as she occasionally said to Julia, “It is too bad, and I am sorry for you; sorry for us all.”

Looking upon Godfrey as her own especial property, Alice felt that whatever affected the Schuylers affected her, and she was sorry accordingly for this thing about to happen, but it did not hurt her as it did Julia and Emma, who must call the strange woman mother, and who wept on until Miss Rossiter sent for them to come to her room together with Miss Creighton. She had taken some brandy, and felt better, though her heart was aching still with a dreary sense of loss, and disappointment, and disgrace, if half Godfrey had written was true, and half was all that any stretch of her imagination would allow her to believe, and when the young girls entered the room she said to them:

“I have sent for you to talk over this dreadful thing, and to say that I do not credit all Godfrey’s story. He is a sad boy to exaggerate, you know. Still, let the woman be what she may, we do not want her here where we have been so happy.”

Miss Rossiter’s voice faltered a little, but soon recovering herself, she continued:

“No, we do not want her here; and I for one declare war,—war to the knife!”

She spoke bitterly now, and her black eyes flashed with contemptuous scorn.

“But Aunt Christine,” Emma said, “it is father’s house, and he will not let you treat her badly.”

“Nor shall I,” Miss Rossiter said, loftily; “I shall let her alone severely, and leave as soon as possible after her arrival. 154Nor shall I leave my sister’s daughters with the adventuress. I’ve been thinking it over, and have concluded to rent or buy a place in New York, and set up housekeeping for myself, in which case you will go with me, and leave your father to enjoy life with his low-born bride.”

“Father wrote she was a lady, and Godfrey says we shall like her,” Emma quickly interposed, feeling that for herself she preferred staying with the “adventuress” to living with Aunt Christine.

Julia, on the contrary, was caught with the house in New York. The city was far more to her taste than the dull country, and, with a withering glance at her sister, she said:

“I’m ashamed of you, Em, that you cannot appreciate auntie’s offer, but speak, instead, for that woman. I, for one, am greatly obliged to auntie, and shall go with her to New York?”

“And I, too, if she will have me. I’d rather live anywhere than at Uncle Calvert’s,” Alice said; “and I hope the house will be near the Park. Won’t it be nice, though?”

“Yes, I mean to have it nice,” Miss Rossiter said, warming into something like enthusiasm as she thought of a home of her own. “I shall furnish it elegantly, and have a reception every week, with little recherché dinner parties for our circle.”

Julia began to be interested, and hoped she should see a little society before she was quite forty, while Alice resolved to be married from that house near the Park, instead of “Uncle Calvert’s poky little bandbox down on Washington Square.”

And while the three ladies planned and talked of the new house in the city, each was conscious of a pang as she thought of leaving the delightful place, where was so much of comfort and luxury, with no shadow of care or trouble. And of the three, Miss Rossiter felt it the most keenly. Naturally indolent and fond of her ease, she had enjoyed her sister’s house, and hated much to leave it, but the fiat had gone forth.

There was to be a new mistress at Schuyler Hill, whose name was not Rossiter, and she must go. She settled that point at 155once, and then said to the young girls by way of caution, for pride in her brother-in-law was still strong within her:

“I think it will be better not to mention Godfrey’s letter,—that is, not to speak of the woman’s personal appearance, which may not be so bad as we fear. Let her show for herself what she is. We must tell, of course, of the expected marriage, but we need say nothing further.”

In this reasonable advice all three of the girls concurred, and yet through some agency it was soon rumored all over Hampstead that the new lady of Schuyler Hill was deformed, and homely and poor, and the hired companion of the late Mrs. Sinclair, and that Miss Rossiter had declared war to the knife, while Julia talked of poison, and Emma cried day and night and would not be comforted. Who told all this, nobody knew. Possibly it was the governess, and possibly Mrs. Tiffe, who bristled all over those days with importance and secret exultation over her routed and discomfited foe, poor Miss Rossiter. Mrs. Tiffe had had her letter from Col. Schuyler, and Perry, her son, had his also, in which were numerous instructions with regard to the refurnishing of the rooms in the south wing. “All the rooms,” the colonel had said, and he was minute in his directions with regard to the corner room with the bay-window overlooking the river and the mountains beyond. This was to be Mrs. Schuyler’s boudoir, or private sitting-room, and was to be fitted up in drab and pale rose pink, while the sleeping-room, which was separated from it by bath-room and dressing-closet, was to be furnished with blue, and the little room beyond, where the colonel kept his books and private papers, was to be green and oak.

“Let everything be new and in the latest style,” the colonel wrote to Perry. “You can get men up from New York who will know just what is needful, while the ladies and your mother will give you the benefit of their advice and good taste, so I shall expect to find everything perfect when I come.”

To Mrs. Tiffe the colonel wrote, saying that from past experience he knew he could rely upon her, and hoped she would give the matter her own personal supervision, in which case it 156would be right. Thus flattered and trusted and deferred to, Mrs. Tiffe espoused the cause of the new wife, and hurrahed for the coming change of government at Schuyler Hill. Anything was preferable to Miss Rossiter, and Mrs. Tiffe cared little whether Edith walked with two crutches or one, provided she freed her from the enemy.

“My son will obey orders to the letter,” she said, crisply, when Julia asked what Perry meant to do. “If the colonel says the south wing must be cleared and refurnished, it will be, and Miss Rossiter may as well vacate to-day as to-morrow. There’s no time to be lost in dawdling.”

Now, the corner room, with the wide bay-window, was the room of all others which Miss Rossiter preferred, and she had appropriated it to herself and held possession of it in spite of Mrs. Tiffe’s broad hints that there were other apartments in the house besides the “very best chamber.” But she must give it up now, and with many a sigh of regret she saw Kitty gather up her bottles of medicine, her boxes of pills, her wine and her brandy, and galvanic battery, and bear them to another closet on the opposite side of the house, away from the river and mountains, where her only view was the little town, which she detested, and the hill rising darkly behind it. It was hard, and Miss Rossiter felt very much injured and aggrieved, and cried softly to herself, and thought very bitter things of that woman who had brought her to this strait, and for whom the house was being turned upside down.

Mrs. Tiffe was already at work with her maids in the south wing taking up carpets, removing furniture, washing windows, and in the room just vacated by Miss Rossiter burning coffee, and sugar, and paper by way of removing the smell of drugs with which the apartment was permeated. But do what she would the faint odor of valerian was still perceptible, making the good woman “sick as a dog,” as she expressed it, and bringing into requisition as a last experiment burnt feathers, which, combined with the valerian, made the atmosphere of the place unbearable.

“Paint will do it and nothing else,” was Mrs. Tiffe’s final 157verdict, as she retreated to the open window and leaned out for a breath of pure air.

Not the slightest interest did either of the ladies show in the changes being made, but Mrs. Tiffe and her son felt themselves equal to the task until it came to selecting carpets, and furniture and curtains in New York. Then Perry said some one ought to go with him and not let him take the entire responsibility.

But neither Miss Rossiter, nor Julia, nor Alice, made any response, and the probability was that he would go alone until the morning came, when Emma appeared at breakfast in her walking-dress and announced her intention to accompany Perry.

“Somebody ought to go for father’s sake,” she said; “and if no one else will, I must. I shall stop at Uncle Calvert’s and get auntie to help me.”

To this there was no open opposition. Miss Rossiter had the toothache and could not talk, while Julia merely raised her eyebrows in token of her surprise; and Alice said:

“You are certainly very kind, Em, and forgiving, to be so much interested for that woman.”

“It isn’t for that woman; it’s for father, and because I know he wishes it,” Emma replied, as she put on her hat and shawl and started with Perry for New York.

She was gone three days, and at the end of that time four men appeared at Schuyler Hill and commenced the work of measuring, repainting and frescoing the rooms intended for the bride. Then in due time came the carpets, and the lambrequins, and the lace curtains, and the furniture, and more men to see that everything fitted and was as it should be.

“Handsome enough for the queen herself,” Mrs. Tiffe said, when all was done, and she walked complacently through the suite of rooms, sniffing occasionally as she passed the open closet, to see if there lingered yet the faintest approach to valerian or drug of any kind.

There did not. Paint and varnish had killed all that, and the air of the rooms was pure and sweet as the rooms themselves 158were beautiful and attractive. I used those days to be occasionally at the great house, and, as I never presumed upon my acquaintance with the ladies, or tried to force myself upon their notice, they treated me with a good deal of kindness, and seemed to like my society. So when, one Saturday morning after the repairs were finished, I met Miss Julia in the village, and she said, in her usual half-cordial, half-indifferent tone, “What an age it is since you were to see us. Suppose you come round this afternoon, and have a game of croquet, and stay to dinner,” I accepted the invitation, and at about 4 p.m. rang the bell at Schuyler Hill.

I did not suppose I was very early, especially as we were to play croquet; but the ladies, who always slept after lunch, were not yet dressed, and so I went with Mrs. Tiffe to the kitchen, to see some jelly she had been making, and which had “come beautifully.” As I was about returning to the parlor she said to me:

“Don’t you want to see them rooms?”

I knew what she meant, and answered that I did.

Taking me first into the green room, where the oak leaves in the rich velvet carpet looked as if you might pick them up, Mrs. Tiffe opened the doors through, and asked what I thought of the effect. It was beautiful beyond anything I had dreamed. Especially was I delighted with the parlor, where the carpet was of that soft chiné pattern so tasteful and exquisite; and the furniture was delicate drab, with trimmings of pale rose pink. There were rare pictures on the wall, and curtains of finely-wrought lace before the windows, with lambrequins of rose pink satin to match the furniture, while cushions, and easy-chairs, and ottomans, and inlaid tables, which almost told their price themselves, were scattered about in such a way as to give the room an air of cosey, home-like comfort as well as elegance.

How lovely it all was, and how like a dream it seemed to be looking at it, and knowing that it was real and not a mere illusion! Then, as I remembered what I had heard of the bride’s deformity and plainness, I thought it such a pity that the occupant of these rooms should not be lovely like them, and a fitting ornament for so much grandeur.

159Lady Emily, with her pale, sallow face and expressionless eyes, would have looked better there, I said, or even Miss Rossiter herself, who when dressed and feeling well was still very attractive, and when I went down stairs and found her sitting on the veranda, in her white cambric dress, with the scarlet shawl she wore so much wrapped around her, her glossy black hair becomingly arranged, with a single white flower among the heavy braids, I thought the colonel would have done far better to have taken her than the bride he had chosen.

We had a very quiet, stupid, six-hand game of croquet, and the dinner was quieter, stupider still, for all the ladies seemed preoccupied and disinclined to talk. Not a word was said of the marriage by any one until I was leaving, when Emma came up to me, and whispered softly:

“They are in New York. We had a telegram this afternoon.”

She did not say who they were, but I pressed her hand in token of my sympathy, for I knew that they had reference to the new mistress of Schuyler Hill.

CHAPTER XXIII.
MRS. ROGERS AND GERTIE AT HAMPSTEAD.

he voyage, which, owing to adverse winds, had been unusually long, was over, and the names of “Col. Schuyler, lady and maid” were registered at the hotel, where they were to stop for a week or more before going to their home in Hampstead. Macpherson and Godfrey were there also, the latter showing the city to his friend, who cared only for the studios and galleries of paintings. After her husband’s reproof Edith had made no attempt to see Gertie Westbrooke, but she had inquired for her every day and sent many delicacies to her, and once, in the distance, she had seen her shawl wrapped around a little figure which was leaning over the railing, with masses of bright hair falling beneath the scarlet 160hood, and to herself she said: “That must be Gertie Westbrooke.”

But further than that she knew nothing of the child, until she heard Godfrey talking to his father about the cottage Mrs. Rogers was to have.

“Yes, certainly, I’ll ask Mrs. Schuyler,” Colonel Schuyler said to some suggestion of Godfrey, and then added, with a laugh: “It seems, Edith, that this child in whom you were so much interested is to be my tenant, or rather Godfrey’s, as the cottage is his. He, too, has taken a most unaccountable fancy to the girl, and as I have ordered your suite of rooms to be wholly refurnished, Godfrey has suggested that we let this Mrs. Rogers have as much of the old furniture as will be suitable for that cottage. She has everything to buy, of course, and not much means, I dare say.”

This was just like Colonel Schuyler. He was very generous with his pride, and he really wished to make some amends for his conduct with regard to Gertie and the shawl. Ever since that affair he had felt that he might have acted hastily, while Edith’s meek acquiescence with his wishes touched him in a tender point, and now, when the Rogers people came into notice again, he seized the opportunity to do them a favor if possible.

“They can think they are renting the furniture with the house,” he said; and as Edith signified her approval without in the least suspecting what cottage it was which was to receive the furniture from Schuyler Hill, the matter was decided, and Mrs. Rogers was told that she would find the house partly furnished, a fact which gave her much satisfaction.

Since the failure of the bank, money had been scarce with her, and as she could not afford to remain long in New York, even at a cheap boarding-house, she started for Hampstead the third day after landing. Godfrey’s telegram had been received by Perry, the agent, but there was no time for repairs, nor were they needed, as the house had been well kept up and was clean as soap and water and the hands of the late occupant could make it. At the time of refurnishing Edith’s rooms at Schuyler Hill the old furniture had been stored away, some in the servants’ 161rooms, some in the attic, and some in the barn, but it was brought together according to the colonel’s orders, and deposited in the cottage, where it lay waiting the arrival of the new tenants, concerning whom there was much speculation in our little town.

I was on my way from school,—for I was still the village schoolmistress,—and, seeing the door open and people moving about inside, I passed through the gate, and entered the rooms, where I had last seen Heloise Fordham. People called it “Vine Cottage,” it was so entirely covered with vines and creepers, and surrounded with flowering shrubs. And a very pretty place it was, too; for, since it had been Godfrey’s, he had taken great pains to keep it up, and beautify the yard and garden, both of which were fashioned a little after the grounds at Schuyler Hill.

Such a place could not go begging for tenants, but for some reason it had been vacant for five or six weeks, when Godfrey’s telegram was received, bidding Perry get it in readiness for Mrs. Rogers. As we have seen, Perry obeyed orders, and, in spite of the wry faces of the young ladies and Miss Christine’s remonstrance, he collected the articles named in Colonel Schuyler’s dispatch, and carried them to the cottage, where I found them scattered about promiscuously, a half-worn velvet carpet here, a marble table and stand there, and in another place a beautiful rosewood bedstead, bearing the marks of the boy Godfrey’s jack-knife, and a handsome bureau, both too tall to stand in any room except the parlor, where they were not wanted.

“What is all this?” I asked, as I stepped over oil-cloth, and hearth-rug, and curtains. “Who is going to live here?”

“A Mrs. Rogers, cousin to the new madame’s waiting-maid,” Perry replied, with a certain intonation in his voice, which showed me that he had taken his cue from the house on the Hill, and was not inclined to regard with favor the cousin of “madame’s waiting-maid.”

“When is Mrs. Rogers expected?” I asked, and he replied:

“She may come any time, but the colonel will not be 162here for two weeks or more. There’s the old Harry to pay up there,” and he nodded toward the house on the Hill. “I tell you, Miss Rossiter and Miss Schuyler is ridin’ their highest horses.”

It was not for me to question him, and so I made him no reply, but improved the opportunity of going through the house where my old friend, Heloise Fordham, used to live, and where I had bidden her good-by with promises to care for that grave on the hillside. And I had cared for it regularly at first, and then as years went by and she neither came to see my work nor sent me any word, I gradually began to grow a little lax in my labors, and now it was months since I had thought of it. But I remembered it that morning when I stood in Heloise’s old room, where I had seen her with the tears in her eyes and the tremor in her voice as she talked to me of Abelard, who “was not her beau,” and yet very dear to her. There by the window she had stood and cut the long curl of hair and given me the vase for Abelard’s grave.

“And where is the young girl?” I asked myself, “and why has she never written me a line in all these years?”

Then as I thought of the neglected grave, I said, aloud:

“I’ll go there to-morrow and see what I can do. It must be sadly overgrown by this time.”

But it rained the next day and the next, and so I did not go, but came each day by the cottage, where at last I saw the new tenants, Mrs. Rogers and little Gertie Westbrooke.

The child was in the garden close by the fence, and glanced up at me with a look which made me stop instantly to gaze at her, while the smile which broke over her face and shone in her blue eyes took me straight through the gate to her side, and before I knew at all what I was doing or why I was doing it, I was talking to her and seeming to myself like one who walks in a dream and sees there things which he has known and seen before.

Surely that smile, which came and went so frequently, and that voice so clear, and sweet, and ringing, were familiar to me, and I said to the child:

163“Have you been here before?”

“No, ma’am; I was born in London. I never was in America until now, and yet it’s funny that this place seems like home, and my room is just what I thought it would be. Won’t you walk in, please, and see auntie?” she said, and I followed her into the cottage, where she presented me to the woman there with all the air and grace of one born to the purple.

“Auntie, Mrs. Rogers; this lady is,—I don’t believe I know your name.”

And she turned inquiringly to me.

I told her who I was, and then inspected Mrs. Rogers curiously, and wondered to find her so different from Gertie. She spoke very well and appeared well, but showed at once the class to which she belonged; nor did she make pretensions to anything else than she really was,—a plain, sensible woman, who had come to America to better herself and be near Norah, her cousin.

She wanted work, she said, and asked what the probabilities were of her obtaining employment in Hampstead, either as plain sewer or dressmaker, or both. Of course, I heard about the lost money in the bank, and received the impression that she had seen better days. Everybody who comes from the old country has, but that was natural, and I liked her on the whole, and thought her a woman of great tact and observation, and promised her my plain sewing and my influence if she pleased me.

She was very anxious to send Gertie to school at once, she said, and the next day she sat in my school-room in her dainty dress of blue, with her white-ruffled apron, and her auburn hair rippling all over her finely-shaped, intellectual head. I walked home with her that night, and found Mrs. Rogers in a great deal of trouble about the bedstead and the bureau, which seemed so out of place in the cottage.

“Where did they come from? Did the other tenants use them?” she asked, and as I did not see fit to enlighten her, she finally determined to store them away in the woodshed until Mr. Godfrey came. “I am able to furnish a few rooms decently 164well myself,” she said; and three days after, when I called on my way from school, Gertie took me to her room and asked me how I liked it.

It was the same Heloise Fordham used to occupy, and it seemed as if she was there again at my side, as I stood looking at the pretty ingrain carpet and the single bed, with its snow-white draperies, the low chair near the window, and the table for Gertie’s work, and the swinging-shelf for her books.

“It is a pretty room,” I said, “and it looks as it did when Heloise was here.”

“Who?” Gertie asked, sweeping her hair back from her forehead, just as I had seen Heloise do so many times. “Who did you say used to be here?”

“Heloise Fordham, a young girl about my age, or a little older, whose mother occupied this cottage twelve or thirteen years ago,” I replied; and Gertie rejoined:

“Why, that is my name, too!”

“Is it?” I asked, and she rejoined:

“Yes, Gertrude Heloise. I write it Gertrude H. for short. Don’t you know?”

I did not know, and I had no suspicion of that which, had I known it then, would have taken my senses away, I verily believe.

“Tell me about your friend,” she said. “Was she pretty, and good, and happy? I like to know who has occupied my room before me. At Stonewark, where we were a few weeks last summer, they said my room was haunted by a girl who killed herself for love. Auntie did not wish me to sleep there. She’s a bit superstitious, but I was not afraid. I liked it, and tried to keep awake nights to see the ghost which threw itself out of the window just at midnight, but I always went to sleep before it came. Where is Heloise, now?”

I did not know, but, questioned by the eager little girl, I told a part of the story, and then, as she grew interested and begged for “the whole, the very whole,” I told it her, thinking there was no harm in telling, as no one could be wronged. Heloise 165was either married or dead, the latter probably, or she would have written to me, and so it was no matter if I did tell her story and Abelard’s to the child who listened so intently, her eyes filling with tears, which rolled down her cheeks when I spoke of the dead man lying on the grass, his face all wet with blood and a withered white rose pressed inside his flannel shirt. I suppose she cried for him, and to a certain extent I dare say she did, though her first words were: “Poor fellow, I’m so glad he didn’t let Godfrey be killed.”

This was the first time she had mentioned Godfrey to me, and as I had the impression that she did not know him, I was going to ask her about it when she said, eagerly:

“And he was the young girl’s lover, and she only fifteen; that’s funny. I’m twelve, and I should not think of having a beau; but go on and tell me more, and what they did with him, and what she did, and all of them.”

I told her what they did, and how for a day and a night the body lay in the parlor below, and where they buried it, and about the monument and my promise to keep the grave clean and nice.

“And have you done it?” Gertie asked, her cheeks like roses and her eyes as bright as stars.

I confessed to recent neglect, and said I had not been there once during the summer.

“Then it’s awful by this time,” Gertie said. “Let’s go and fix it to-morrow, you and I, will you?”

I promised that I would, and then, as it was growing dark, I bade her good-night, she saying to me in a whisper:

“I’ll not tell auntie about that girl who used to have my room, because if I did I’d have to tell about the body which lay in the parlor, and she would surely see his ghost. She’s afraid of ’em, you know. I guess that class always are.”

She spoke of her auntie’s belonging to a class different from herself as naturally as possible, and still with no shadow of contempt or disrespect in her voice. Mrs. Rogers had always taught her that though she must expect nothing from others on account of it, she was superior to people like herself and Norah, 166and Gertie accepted it as a fact, not knowing exactly whether it was the forty pounds a year or the big house where she used to live, or the dead mother, or the father who would not own her, or the grandmother she had never seen, which gave her the precedence.

The next day, true to my promise, I took Gertie to the Schuyler Cemetery and showed her Abelard’s grave.

“James A. Lyle, born in Alnwick, England, 18—. Died June —, 18—, aged 23 years. Honor to the dead who died to save another’s life,” she read aloud, kneeling on the grass before the monument which marked his resting-place.

“Oh, how nice that is. ‘Honor to the dead who died to save another’s life,’ and that other was Mr. Godfrey,” she said. “And Colonel Schuyler put it here. I like him now better than I did. I thought he was proud and cold, but there must be good in him. Why, it’s a splendid stone, and must have cost as much as,—as much as forty pounds.”

Her income was her maximum for an unheard-of sum, and she stood gazing admiringly at the stone, while her busy tongue went on.

“And this is a pretty yard, with all those old Schuylers buried here. I mean, old really, you know. I don’t say it for bad nicknames. They were all old. ‘Emily, beloved wife of Colonel Howard Schuyler, aged 36,’ is the youngest of them all, and she was awful old. That must be Colonel Schuyler’s first wife, Mr. Godfrey’s mother. Was she as pretty, I wonder, as the new lady is? No, you have not kept the grave up nice; that girl would feel badly if she saw it. Let’s go straight to work and pull up the nasty weeds first; and look, here’s a clump of lovely forget-me-nots down in the grass, and sweet English violets.”

She talked so fast and went so rapidly from one thing to another that I had no chance to say a word, but stood watching her silently as she worked with a will, pulling up the weeds and digging about the flowers which had been making a faint struggle for life in the grass which impeded their growth. Whether she was working for the sake of the young girl Heloise, 167or because it was Godfrey’s life which had been saved by the necessity for that grave, I could not tell. She talked of both, and when her task was done, and flushed and heated with exercise, she sat down to rest, she said:

“There, Miss Heloise Fordham will feel better now, I hope, and I wouldn’t wonder if Mr. Godfrey liked me to be kind to the man who saved his life. Was she very pretty, Miss Armstrong?”

I knew she meant Heloise, although her last remark had been of Godfrey, and I replied:

“Yes, very pretty. Do you know you look a little like her, only your hair is auburn, and hers was golden brown, while your eyes are blue and hers were a brownish gray.”

“Do I? Am I like her? Am I pretty? Mr. Godfrey said I was,” she exclaimed, her face lighting up with a glow which made her, as I thought, the most beautiful creature I had ever seen.

“You have spoken of Mr. Godfrey several times,” I said. “Where did you know him?”

“Why, on the ship and in the cab, and in the church when his new mother was married, and everywhere,” she replied; and then, by dint of a few questions adroitly put, I heard nearly all she had to tell of Godfrey, who had stared at her in the cab, and kissed her flowers in church, and herself on shipboard.

“But he’ll never do that again,” she said. “I told him it wasn’t proper, and he said he wouldn’t, until—until—” her face grew crimson as she continued,—“until, I could say I thought him a perfect gentleman, with no slang or nonsense, and then he is to kiss me again, but that will never be, I reckon.”

She stuck up the toe of her little foot and looked demurely at it while she settled the kissing affair with so much gravity, and I,—well, my thoughts did leap into the future and then leaped back again when I remembered Alice Creighton and the proud girls at Schuyler Hill. As if divining something of my thoughts, Gertie asked abruptly: “Do you know Mr. Godfrey’s sisters? He told me he had two.”

“Yes, I know them; they were my pupils last year, when their governess left suddenly,” I said; and she continued:

“Are they pretty, and shall I ever see them?”

168I dare say she meant to ask if they would notice her, and as I knew they would not I gave her question another meaning, and replied:

“They are almost always at church, and the Schuyler pew is the large square one in front. You will be sure to see them there.”

“Yes, I am going next Sunday, but we must sit near the door, I suppose. Still, I shall see them come in, for I mean to be early, and I do hope Mr. Godfrey will be here by that time with the beautiful lady Edith.”

Here was an opportunity I could not let slip, my woman’s curiosity was so strong, and so I said:

“Is Mrs. Schuyler beautiful?”

“Yes, I guess she is; the beautifullest woman I ever saw. Why, she looked like a queen the morning she was married, and more like his daughter than his wife.”

“Have you seen her often? Were you near her in church?” I asked in some surprise, unable to reconcile her statement of the new Mrs. Schuyler’s beauty, with a rumor which had reached me in a roundabout way concerning her age and personal appearance.

“Yes, I was very near her in church and threw her some flowers, and I saw her many times at Oakwood, in the grounds where she walked in her pretty white dresses. I did not speak to her, you know. I was some ways off, but I could see how handsome she was, and everybody said so, too.”

Gertie’s reply puzzled me, for I knew that the Schuyler Hill ladies were expecting something dreadful in the bride and were preparing themselves accordingly, while Gertie’s story seemed to contradict the entire thing. But all I had to do was to wait and see for myself, so I asked no more questions, and as the afternoon was drawing to a close, we left the cemetery and took a path homeward, which led near to the great house on the hill. The ladies were playing croquet on the lawn, and Gertie pulled my dress and whispered:

“See, there they are, four ladies; which are the sisters, and who are the others?”

169I pointed out Julia and Emma Schuyler, and told her the lady in the black dress and scarlet shawl was Miss Rossiter, Godfrey’s aunt, and that the light-haired girl, with her hair put up so high, was Miss Alice Creighton from New York, who spent a great deal of time at Schuyler Hill, as the colonel was her guardian.

“Oh, how I like to play croquet! Why, if I can only get a ball, I can go clear round the ground the first time. Do you think they would ask us to join them if we went nearer?” she said; and I replied that I hardly thought they would care to give up that game for the sake of taking us in, while to myself I wondered at her temerity in proposing such a thing.

I did not know her then as well as I did afterward, for though she could tell Godfrey Schuyler that he must not talk to her because she was poor, in her heart she was a born aristocrat, and felt no distinction except the accident of wealth between herself and people like the Schuylers. She never forgot that her mother was a lady, and though she had but forty pounds a year and her auntie was a seamstress, she felt no inferiority to any one, and expected kindness and attention from all. It was a little singular that of the four ladies in the lawn she should have singled out Alice Creighton as the subject for remark, and not very complimentary remarks either.

“Why does she wear her hair so high?” she asked, and when I explained that it was the fashion, she answered: “But it is very ugly, and makes her look so queer. Will Mr. Godfrey like that? He said mine was pretty in my neck;” and taking off her white cape sun-bonnet she let her bright, wavy hair fall in masses around her face and down her back.

“You are a little girl,” I said, “and Miss Creighton is seventeen, and engaged, I guess.”

“Engaged!” she repeated. “That’s funny, and she so young. Is it Mr. Godfrey?”

I was stooping to button my boot, and did not answer her, while she forgot to put the question again, and clutching my arm, said in a whisper:

“Look, she is coming here; this way; right toward us.”

170“Good-evening, Miss Armstrong,” Alice said. “I saw you standing here, and got our governess to take my place, while I came to ask if you know of any one who can do fluting nicely, and plain sewing as well. Adams is sick just when I need her most, and I thought you might know of some one.”

“I do,—I know,—auntie flutes and sews splendidly,” Gertie’s voice rang out clear and silvery as a bell, while Alice stared at her superciliously at first; then curiously; and turned to me with a questioning look in her haughty eyes.

I knew Miss Creighton would never forgive me if I introduced her formally to the protégée of one who did fluting and plain sewing, so I merely said:

“This is Gertie Westbrooke, my pupil, whose auntie lives at Vine Cottage, and will I dare say be glad of your work.”

Gertie bowed, but Alice’s head was high as ever, and as she had thrown off her hat she did look funny with that little ball of hair perched on the top of her head. But it was fashionable, and Alice led the fashions in Hampstead, and it was not for me to criticise, though I did mentally compare the two girls, as they stood there side by side, Gertie, with her wealth of auburn hair, on which the setting sunlight fell, her blue eyes opened wide and full of eager interest in the girl who was engaged, her simple gingham frock, her pretty frilled white apron and rather coarse shoes; the whole so different from the ruffled silk, old enough for a woman of twenty-five, the dainty boots of bronze, the profusion of jewelry, the elaborately arranged hair, the small, retroussé nose, and the half-shut sleepy eyes which stared so hard at Gertie, as if she were a new species of the animal kingdom never seen before.

“Yes, I heard Godfrey had some new tenants in his house,” Alice said; “and I am glad to know the woman can sew and flute. I wonder if she does it well? Did she do this?”

And she put out her hand to lift Gertie’s apron for inspection.

But the child took a step backward, and said, with the manner of a duchess:

171“Yes, she did this; and she sews very well. You can judge for yourself by trying her.”

Alice elevated her eyebrows and nose, and I was almost certain the ball on her head took an upward inclination too, but she said nothing except that she would call to-morrow and see the woman.

“What is her name, did you say?”

I told her Mrs. Rogers; and with a little nod that she understood me, she added:

“You ought to see the way Miss Christine is in. It’s too comical for anything, and would amuse me vastly were it not that I, too, feel vexed, and annoyed, and sorry for the girls. It’s too bad to have such a step-mother brought home to them, and I do not blame them for feeling aggrieved. I should rebel, too, to have such a woman thrust upon me.”

Gertie had stood very quietly listening to Miss Creighton, her eyes growing larger and darker, and the blood mounting to her cheeks and brow, which were crimson, as she burst out:

“It isn’t so, Miss Creighton, if by ‘such a woman’ you mean something bad. It is not so. Lady Edith is beautiful. I know her. I’ve seen her. She gave me a shawl and sent me things when I was sick.”

Alice, who was or affected to be near-sighted, and carried a glass at her side, raised it to her eyes and inspected this champion of Mrs. Schuyler, saying, with a little laugh:

“Really, I am glad to meet with one of Mrs. Schuyler’s acquaintances, and to hear so good an account of her. Pray, do you know her well?”

Gertie understood her meaning, and answered, spiritedly:

“I am not one of her acquaintances. I am nobody but Gertie Westbrooke, but I’ve seen her many times in the grounds at Oakwood, and when she came to her mother’s where we had lodgings, and I know she is good, and pretty, and a lady, and Mr. Godfrey likes her.”

“Do you know Godfrey too? Your circle of friends must be quite extended,” was Alice’s next remark, to which Gertie did not reply.

172She was tying on her bonnet, and only gave a quick, angry glance at Miss Creighton as she started to walk away.

“That’s a queer little thing,” Alice said, as I stood a moment with her. “Rather pretty, too, isn’t she, with those blue eyes and that bright hair. How she did flame up though in Mrs. Schuyler’s defence! Her account of the lady does not tally with Godfrey’s, but then I suppose it was the shawl and the nice things which caught her fancy. Did she say she was a lodger of Mrs. Schuyler’s mother? That is something quite new, and worse than the hired companion. Poor Jule and Emma. I really pity them, and they so proud and exclusive.”

“Alice, Alice, come, we want you,” came floating across the lawn from Julia Schuyler, and with a quick little nod, such as she always gave me, Miss Creighton went back to her companions, leaving me to think of what Gertie had said about lodging with Mrs. Schuyler’s mother, and to feel, it may be, inly glad that the Schuylers were to be punished a little for their arrogance and pride.

I did not know Edith then.

CHAPTER XXIV.
MRS. ROGERS GETS WORK.

ertie seemed from the first much interested in the young ladies at the Hill, but with the exception of the night when Alice came across the fields to speak to me, she had only seen them at a distance, while they, absorbed as they were in more important matters, had scarcely thought of the occupants of the cottage. Alice’s sewing, however, was peremptory, and as her own seamstress did not come back she resolved at last to call on Mrs. Rogers, and drove, with Emma, to the house, where they found Gertie sitting on the low piazza absorbed in a book and making a very striking picture, with her bright hair falling around her face and neck as her blue eyes looked up at the strangers.

173“Is your mother at home?” Alice asked; and the child replied:

“She is not my mother, and she is out just now. Can I tell her anything from you?”

“Oh,” Alice said, a little impatiently, “that is just my luck. I wanted so much to see her about some plain sewing. Did you say anything to her about it, child?”

“My name is Gertie. Yes, ma’am, I told her, and I think she’d like to do it. She’s only gone to the village after some molasses. I am expecting her every minute. Will you wait till she comes?”

Alice glanced at Emma, who nodded her assent, while Gertie brought them chairs, and then resuming her own, took up her book again and partly opened it.

“Pray don’t let us disturb you,” Alice said. “We can entertain ourselves. What story are you reading?”

“It isn’t a story,” Gertie replied. “It’s Fasquelle, and I’m getting my lesson.”

“Fasquelle!” Alice exclaimed, in much surprise. “Are you studying French?”

“Yes, ma’am; and I’ve most caught up with the class. Miss Armstrong says I am doing famously. I like it so much, only here is some English which I cannot quite put into French. These en’s and ne-gueres bother me. Perhaps you can help me?”

And with the utmost sang froid Gertie brought her grammar to Alice, and with her finger indicated the troublesome passage, which Alice rendered for her.

“She is a queer little thing,” Alice thought, as she went back to her chair and her lesson, while Emma mentally pronounced her the most beautiful child she had ever seen.

Some such thought flitted through Alice’s mind, and when the lesson was gone through, and Gertie closed her book, she began to question her by asking how old she was, and where she had lived, and what Mrs. Rogers was to her if she was not her mother. And Gertie told her all she knew of herself and her father and mother, and that she had a grandmother and forty 174pounds a year. And then she spoke of her aunt’s loss in the bank shares, and added:

“After that, we couldn’t lodge any more, because, you see, we are poor, and so we came to America to seek our fortune and be near Norah, Mrs. Schuyler’s maid, who is auntie’s cousin, you know.”

Here was an opportunity for learning something definite of Edith, and Alice was about to question Gertie when Mrs. Rogers appeared, a jug of molasses in one hand and a basket of eggs in the other. She seemed flurried and surprised at sight of the ladies, and asked Gertie why she had not invited them in.

“We are better here,” Alice said. “We only came on business. I am wanting some plain sewing done, and called to see if you can do it for me.”

She was civil enough, and Mrs. Rogers, who really wanted work, signified her willingness to do anything she could. Specimens of her handiwork were brought forth for examination, and Alice criticised and offered suggestions with the manner of a woman of forty, and finally arranged to try her, provided the price was not too high. That, too, proved satisfactory, and then the young lady arose to take leave, saying:

“Perhaps you will let your little girl come for the work, to-morrow.”

“No, I will go myself,” Mrs. Rogers answered quickly, and added, in an undertone: “it is not as if she were my own child, and in my station in life. She is different, and must be brought up different. I mean she shall have the very best of educations. Do you know of any piano I can rent, or of any place where she can go to practise? I mean her to take lessons at once.”

Alice stared wonderingly at her, and answered rather haughtily that she knew nothing about renting pianos, or places where one could practise.

“Such airs!” she said to Emma, as they walked home together. “French and music with clear-starching and plain sewing. That girl will be much better off to be brought up to work than to get such notions into her head.”

“Yes, but isn’t she pretty?” Emma said, remembering the 175flowing hair, the soft, blue eyes, and the fair, round face more distinctly than she did Fasquelle, and the airs which had so offended Alice.

“Pretty enough. Such people often are when young, but they always degenerate sadly.”

“Yes, but she is not like such people,” Emma rejoined. “Don’t you remember what the woman said?”

“Yes, I know. The child has a grandmother and forty pounds a year, but for all that I reckon she is about like Mrs. Rogers, and would much better be learning to sew than playing the piano. I wonder if she would not like to practise on your beautiful Steinway.”

Alice spoke contemptuously, not from any feeling toward Gertie especially, but from contempt for those of her class who aspired to something better. They had no business to be ambitious; it was their duty to be content in the station where God had placed them. This was her theory, and she continued to dwell upon it even after she reached home, and made a good deal of fun of the girl with forty pounds a year and a grandmother, who had asked her help in French, and was going to take music lessons!

CHAPTER XXV.
THEY COME.

t was the day after the young ladies’ visit to Vine Cottage and the third week since Mrs. Rogers’ arrival in town. I had dismissed my school earlier than usual that afternoon, and at Gertie’s request, went with her to the Schuyler Cemetery. She had heard that Mr. and Mrs. Schuyler and Godfrey were expected every day, and she wanted to have that grave looking real nice, as she was sure Mr. Godfrey would be pleased to find that somebody had cared for it. So it was for Godfrey’s sake that she weeded, and dug, and trimmed, and watered, while I sat watching her, and thinking of another 176young girl, who, years ago, had laid her face in the grass and wept for the dead beneath it.

Where was she now? Dead, perhaps, and gone to the lover lost so early; or it might be that she was married and had forgotten that far-off grave, which she had bidden me keep till she came back again. I had neglected it of late, but my work was taken from my hands by little Gertie Westbrooke, who had made a miniature garden of the spot, and brought to light and life the flowers I had put there in the summers past and gone. There were clumps of white daisies and blue forget-me-nots, and the sweet English violet, with other hardy roots which bear our northern winters, while the rose brought from Vine Cottage yard had wound itself round the tall monument, and was reaching out its arms toward the evergreen which grew near by. There were some violets in blossom now, while, better than all, there was a clump of buds upon the rose tree, the summer’s second growth, and Gertie plucked two of them, and gathered some white daisies and blue forget-me-nots, and sitting down upon the grass she made them into a tiny bouquet, with sweet-brier for a background of green, and told me she was going to carry them home and keep them in her room.

I had shown her the little vase which Heloise Fordham left with me, and she had filled it with flowers that afternoon and brought it to the grave, where, just under the shadow of the rose, it stood a sweet offering to the memory of the dead, who, far away in the other world, knew, perhaps, whose feet were treading the sod above him, and whose the little hands so busy with his grave.

How pretty my darling was that afternoon, with the flush on her face and the sparkle in her eyes, as, with the bouquet in her hands, she walked with me back to the cottage, where I was going to help her a little in her French; and how gayly she chattered, sometimes about herself and what she meant to be, and then of the young ladies from the Hill who had called at the cottage the day before.

“I don’t think Miss Creighton very pretty,” she said, “though she looks just like the pictures in the fashion books. Miss 177Emma is handsomer than she, but neither are half as handsome as Mrs. Schuyler.”

“I believe you think Mrs. Schuyler very pretty,” I said, and she replied:

“Pretty, I guess she is! She is beautiful,—just like a grand duchess.”

“How old is she?” I asked.

“Oh, I don’t know. How old are you, Miss Armstrong?”

I told her almost twenty-seven, and she exclaimed:

“That is very old! I don’t think Mrs. Schuyler can be half as old as that. She looks just like a girl. Oh! oh! oh! there she is! There she is! Look, look, Miss Armstrong, they come! they come!”

We were very near Gertie’s home, and the excited child pointed toward an open barouche which had turned the corner and was just opposite the cottage. I recognized Colonel Schuyler at once, but not for an instant did my gaze rest on him; it wandered to the lady at his side, the peerless creature whose fine-cut face, framed in masses of golden-brown hair, was white and pure as a water-lily, and whose dark eyes scanned eagerly the cottage and its surroundings, and then rested upon Gertie and myself with a curious, wondering look.

“I mean to throw her this as a welcome,” Gertie cried, and the bouquet gathered from Abelard’s grave went whirling through the air, and fell directly in Edith’s lap, while Gertie snatched her bonnet from her head and shook it toward the carriage, her hair falling in rippling waves around her shoulders, and her face radiant with joy.

How the lady’s eyes gleamed, while the expression of her face and the wondrous smile which wreathed her lips and showed her white, even teeth, I never shall forget. She held the bouquet in her hand, and we heard her distinctly utter the word “thanks,” as the carriage went rapidly by. Twice she looked back, the same smile on her face and the same pleased look in her eye, as Gertie kissed the tips of her fingers and threw them toward her.

“Isn’t she beautiful?” Gertie asked.

178“Yes, very beautiful, I replied,” as I stood looking after her, and wondering at the opinion so different held of her at Schuyler Hill, and wondering, too, what they would think of her when they found what she was like.

Afterward I heard from one and another what they thought, and said, and did, and will narrate in

CHAPTER XXVI.
HOW THEY RECEIVED HER.

n their return from the cottage the previous night, Alice and Emma found that during their absence a telegram had come from Colonel Schuyler, who said he should be home the following day, and asked that the carriage might meet him at the station.

Miss Rossiter, of course, did not sleep a wink, and came down to breakfast looking frightfully haggard and yellow, while Julia was pale and subdued, and Emma showed traces of tears. It was almost as bad as the day of the first Mrs. Schuyler’s funeral, and only Mrs. Tiffe and Perry showed any signs of interest in the coming event.

But as the day wore on the girls brightened up, and Alice and the governess made some bouquets for the dinner table, and put one in Godfrey’s room, but none in those of the bride. Flowers were not for her, a woman of forty with a squint and a limp and glasses! So they only opened the windows of her rooms and let in the soft air of early September, and Emma cried a little as she looked across the lawn to where her mother slept, and wondered if she knew, or knowing, cared that another was in her place. And then she went to her Aunt Christine and told her it was time to dress, and asked if she was coming down. Miss Rossiter had the headache and lay upon the couch, and said she must be excused. She could not meet the woman that night; she must wait till morning, when she hoped to be stronger and better able to bear it. So Emma dropped the shades and brought the camphor to her aunt and smoothed her 179hair a moment, and almost wished she, too, had the headache, and then went to Alice and Julia, who were dressing, and who gave her a meaning look as she entered.

“What, black this warm day?” Emma exclaimed, as she saw Julia had chosen a plain black grenadine, which, with the simple white band about her neck, gave her the look of one in mourning.

“Yes, black,” Julia replied. “I do not feel like decking myself as for a festival. This is no holiday to us, and Kitty has brought out your plain grenadine for you.”

“And I am horrid in black,” Emma said, plaintively; but she usually submitted to the stronger will of her sister, and so she donned the black dress which made her look so like a nun that, braving Julia’s displeasure, she ventured to tie a bit of lavender ribbon in her hair, and was delighted at the effect.

“Look, isn’t it becoming?” she said. “Surely half-mourning is admissible on the occasion of the new mother’s advent.”

Even Julia admitted that the effect was good, and as she was herself an ardent lover of dress and had adopted her plain garb more from resentment to the living than respect for the dead, she too tried the effect of lavender, and fastened at her throat a pretty bow of ribbon, which brightened her up wonderfully. Alice, who had nothing to resent, and who wished to be as attractive as possible to Godfrey after his long absence, indulged her taste to its fullest extent, and succeeded in getting her hair higher than she had ever gotten it before. Godfrey was of course accustomed to the very latest styles of Parisian hair-dressing, and she did not wish to appear singular to him, she said, when Emma exclaimed:

“Why, Alice, how funny you do look!”

Taken as a whole, she was frightfully and fashionably dressed, and very much pleased with her tout ensemble, and certain she should completely overawe and confound the plain woman of forty, who was momentarily expected. The barouche had been sent for the colonel according to his orders, and Godfrey’s buggy had been sent for him, as he might bring a friend with him, his telegram said. But Robert Macpherson was not quite ready 180to leave New York, and preferred coming to the country a few days later. So Godfrey drove home alone, choosing a shorter road than that taken by the barouche, and reaching the house some ten minutes earlier than his father.

“Oh, girls, girls, there is Godfrey!” Emma cried, as she caught sight of her brother driving up to the rear of the house; and rushing out to meet him she threw her arms around him and burst into tears.

“Why, Emma, you dear little goose,” he said, as he bent his tall figure down to kiss her, “what are you crying about? Sorry to get your scamp of a brother back, eh?”

“No, no, Godfrey. I’m so glad to have you, only I dread that woman! Is she so very horrid?”

“Horrid! Who horrid?” Godfrey asked, while every muscle of his face twitched with suppressed mirth. “Do you mean the new mother? You must not mind her looks; beauty is only skin deep, and she is like a singed cat, better than she looks. You are sure to like her. Ah, Julia, my darling, how like a sister of charity you look!” he continued, as he released Emma, and kissing his other sister affectionally, he wound an arm around each of the girls, and walked to the house, where Alice was waiting for him, and scanning him curiously.

“He certainly has improved in looks, and there is quite a foreign air about him, and his clothes are Paris made,” she thought, and her spirits rose proportionately as she advanced leisurely to meet him.

“Ah, Mademoiselle Alice,” he exclaimed. “Comment vous portez vous,” and kissing her loudly on both cheeks he continued: “Que pensez-vous de cela? Doesn’t it smack of foreign travel?”

Alice had not quite expected this, but the French delighted her, though she inly pronounced the accent horrid, and the hearty kisses pleased her, even if they were wet and loud, and she blushed very becomingly, and called him a “dear, naughty boy,” and kept hold of his hand until he freed it from her, thinking to himself that she was unusually gushing, and not a whit pretty either.

181“By George, Allie,” he began, as his eyes rested on her hair. “No, I don’t mean that. I’ve quit slang,” he added, with a thought of Gertie Westbrooke; “but, Allie, what is that on the top of your head? It looks like the door-knob, and makes me think of that picture of William Tell’s boy with the big apple on his head. Got a story above the style this time. Should think you’d take cold in the back of your neck. They don’t wear it so in Par-ee.”

And with his light badinage he demolished Alice’s hopes of admiration, and struck a blow at the wonderful structure she had spent so much time in rearing.

“Godfrey, Godfrey,” Julia cried in a tremor of distress and agitation as she caught the sound of wheels, and felt that the catastrophe so dreaded was coming at last. “Tell us true, is she so fearfully ugly?”

“She’s wonderful, and you may as well bring out your smelling salts and camphor,” Godfrey replied; and then grasping Julia by the shoulder and calling to his other sister: “Come, Em, and see the elephant,” he led the way to the front door, where Edith stood looking eagerly about her, not limping nor squinting, nor ugly, nor old, but a marvellously beautiful woman, with ease and grace in every motion, and no sign of embarrassment or awkwardness about her.

There was a flush on her cheek and a glitter in her eyes, but otherwise she was calm and self-possessed when her husband took her hand and led her up the steps to the group of astonished and bewildered girls, who had looked this way and that, and then, under their breath, had ejaculated, hurriedly:

“Why—what—who—oh—oh—Godfrey, Godfrey, you WRETCH!”

And that last word embodied Julia’s feelings, as, with one glance at her brother, who stood choking with laughter, she went to meet the stranger.

“Julia, my eldest daughter; Mrs. Schuyler, your new mother, and I hope you will love each other,” the colonel said.

And then Julia felt her hand taken in one as soft, and small, and perfectly formed as her own, and a sweet voice said, as 182if to relieve her from any embarrassment respecting the mother:

“We will be sisters, I am sure. Kiss me, Julia.”

This was not what the young lady had expected. No thought of kissing had entered her mind. Indeed, she meant to freeze the adventuress by her formality and dignity, and lo, the woman was dictating terms to her, saying they would be sisters and asking for a kiss! But it was not hard to kiss the smooth, round cheek offered to her, and, when the sweet voice said again, “You will love me, Julia, I am sure, and let me love you,” the haughty girl answered involuntarily, “Yes, I will,” and then, with a tear actually wetting her eyelashes, stood back to give place to Emma, who, more impulsive than herself, went headlong into the arms which Edith held toward her, and cried like a little child.

Miss Creighton came next, bowing almost to the ground and offering the tips of her fingers to the lady, who received her just as coldly, though with far more ease and graceful breeding perceptible in her manner.

They were in the hall by this time, and Mrs. Tiffe stood waiting to greet her new mistress, her black silk rustling at every step and her yellow lace showing age and cost, as with her gold-bowed glasses in her hand and her bunch of keys jingling suggestively on the chain at her side, she paid her respects to madame, and thought as she did so how she would like to thrash the scapegrace, Godfrey, who had so misled them. He was choking with laughter just outside the door, where his sisters were going through with a pantomime of threatening gestures for the trick played upon them.

“Godfrey Schuyler, how could you?” Julia began in a whisper, while Godfrey suddenly remembering that he had not seen his Aunt Christine, stepped back into the hall and asked where she was.

On being told she had a headache, he said:

“I must go up and see her,” and with a sign for Julia and Alice to follow, he ran up the stairs in the direction of Miss Rossiter’s room.

183But Emma was there before them. As soon as the first moment of amazement was over she had gone swiftly to her aunt’s chamber, and rushing in unannounced, had exclaimed:

“Oh, Aunt Christine, she is the most beautiful woman you ever looked upon. It was all a fib he wrote us. She is splendid and hasn’t a bit of a limp nor anything, and looks about twenty. Do get up, auntie, and go to dinner.”

Miss Rossiter was amazed, and sitting up on the side of her bed, was trying to knot her long black hair under her net, while she put some questions to Emma, when the door burst open a second time, and Godfrey himself came in full of life, and health, and vigor, and by his very presence doing more to dissipate the lady’s headache than all the drugs in her closet.

“Hallo, Aunt Christine,” he said; “done up in camphor and herbs, as usual? Let’s try what a little exercise will do for you.”

And taking her in his arms he waltzed gayly about the room, the girls laughing and the lady protesting and struggling to get free, until she had danced her hair down and a bright color into her face.

“There, auntie, you are real handsome now,” Godfrey said, as he released her with a hearty kiss, and leading her to the couch, seated himself beside her, with his arm around her waist. “Now, girls, pitch in; I’m ready for you,” he said; as they began to accuse him of deceit in its most aggravating form, asking how he could do it.

“Do what?” he asked. “What are you making such a fuss about?”

“I should think you’d ask,” Julia replied. “Telling us she was forty and had a glass eye, and a squawk in her voice, and everything else that is bad.”

“I never told you any such thing,” Godfrey answered, with great gravity; and the three girls exclaimed, in chorus:

“Oh, Godfrey Schuyler! You did, you did. We have the letter. You wrote, ‘Think of father’s marrying a woman of forty with a glass eye, and——’”

“Oh, yes, well, of course, that’s a different thing,” Godfrey 184replied. “I did tell you to think of it, I know, and you evidently have thought of it, and had a good time at it, but I never said it was so. I told you ‘she would take your breath away when you saw her,’ and she did. You all three opened your eyes and mouths and stared at her as if you never saw a handsome woman before. And she is handsome, isn’t she? Now, confess it, girls; and say she is the loveliest creature you ever saw——”

“Oh, Godfrey, I do believe you are half in love with her yourself,” Alice said, a little reproachfully, and the young man replied:

“To be sure I am; and if she had been younger there’s no telling what I might have done, but when I subtracted eighteen from twenty-eight, I said to myself, ‘that will never do; a man may not marry his grandmother;’ and then, Alice, I knew there was a little pug nose over the sea, which would get very red and ugly looking if I did that,” he added, mischievously, as he saw the disturbed look on Alice’s face, and knew why it was there.

“Is she twenty-eight? She does not look it,” Emma said, while Julia and Alice declared she did; and then as women, especially envious ones, will do, they picked her to pieces, from her head to her feet, and putting her together again, decided that though they had seen much finer faces and prettier, too, her tout ensemble was very good, and they were so much relieved, as they had expected something horrid, of which even the villagers would make fun.

“Wait till you see her in her dinner dress,” Godfrey said. “I tell you her gowns are elegant, Paris made, too. I’ve seen them. I know. I’ve travelled.” (This with a wink at Alice.) “And that reminds me, Jule and Em, why are you rigged out in black, this warm, pleasant day? You look as if you were in mourning. I believe you did it on purpose too, but I tell you she is stunning in her dinner costumes, and if you don’t wish to be thrown quite in the shade, I’d take off those black things, and put on something fluffy and light and airy and becoming; and you, auntie, certainly do not mean to stay mewed up here 185on toast and oatmeal, while we are at dinner. Take a big drink from every bottle in the closet, and if that don’t do, try some of your lightning. I’ll fix the battery; and then dress yourself and go down, and look handsome and bright. Why, I think you’ve grown pretty and young while I was gone, and I want that beauty to see that all the good looks are not on her side. The Schuylers have some of it. Come, girls, hurry up.”

They could not withstand Godfrey, especially when he mingled a little seasonable flattery with his persuasions, and both Julia and Emma went to their rooms to change their dress, while Miss Rossiter expressed her willingness to go down if she could be ready in time.

“I’ll help you. I can do it first-rate,” Godfrey said, mischievously, but Miss Rossiter declined his services, and ringing for Kitty, sent him from the room, telling him he might as well attend to his own toilet.

“That’s a fact,” he said. “But my dressing won’t take long. Come, Alice, let’s go out on the balcony awhile;” and leading Miss Creighton to the glass door at the end of the hall, he brought her a chair and seated her in it. “You won’t have to dress, and can talk with me. You’ve got yourself up stunningly, especially that ball on the top of your head. Couldn’t have put that a peg higher if you tried, could you? I say, Alice, why do you want to make yourself such a fright? Do you think it is the style? It isn’t. I saw a few shop-girls and bar-maids with their heads tricked out like yours, but not one lady. I believe you would wear a boot-jack if you thought it was the fashion in Paris!”

“Oh, Godfrey, don’t, please, and you just come home, too,” Alice said, with a tremor in her voice and tears in her eyes.

It hurt her that he should find fault with her personal appearance within an hour of his return after so long an absence, especially as she had taken so much pains to dress for him. Godfrey saw she was hurt, and said to her, coaxingly, as he put his arm around her:

“Never mind, Alice. You are real stylish anyway, and I’m 186so glad to see you again. I am, upon my word, and you used to write to me such nice, sisterly letters. Do you find me improved?”

“Yes, Godfrey, ever so much. I knew you would be. Travel always does that,” Alice said, her spirits a good deal lightened by his few words of commendation. “And, Godfrey,” she continued, “I guess I’ll go and fix my hair now. There will be time.”

She choked a little, for “fixing her hair” was a vast amount of trouble, but if Godfrey was suited, she did not care.

“Nonsense,” he said, tightening the grasp of his arm about her waist, “your hair is well enough for once. Stay with me and let’s talk. Only think how long it is since you had a chance to lecture me except by letter, which does not go for much, and I’m real glad to see you, Allie. I am, by Jo——. No, I mean I am, Allie; I am trying to quit my slang, though it is like pulling teeth sometimes.”

“Yes, Godfrey,” and folding her small, fat hands on her lap, Alice looked happy, and content, and satisfied. “Yes, Godfrey, I knew that trip abroad would effect great things for you.”

“Oh, bother, Allie, it isn’t that. I heard just as much slang, and saw just as many clowns, and snobs, and fools abroad as I ever saw here; and more too. Travel didn’t improve my mind or manners; it was a little girl. Oh! don’t look so disturbed,” he added, as Alice bridled at the mention of a girl. “You needn’t be jealous at all. She isn’t bigger than my thumb, and is only twelve years old. She was on the ship with us and awful sick, and so was I. I tell you what, I have been down to the very depths and felt deep calling unto deep in a way I never wish to hear it call again. Ugh! the very thought of that cold creep which begins at the toes and ends in the spittoon makes me dizzy; and with a swaying motion Godfrey rocked from side to side until his head rested on Alice’s shoulder.

But she moved away from him with dignified propriety, saying:

“Yes, I know, I have been sea-sick too; it is dreadful; but what of the little girl, and who was she?”

187“Oh, yes, I was telling you about her. She had been sick, and was sitting on deck, all wrapped up in shawls and blankets, and looking so like some pure white pond lily, that I kissed her right on the mouth!”

“Godfrey!” Alice exclaimed, indignantly; while he rejoined:

“You are not half as angry as she was. I never saw anything like the gleam in her blue eyes. Had I really insulted her she could not have taken it worse than she did, or reproached me more sharply. I never heard anything like the way she talked to me. Why, I felt as ashamed as a dog, and when she attacked my slang, as she called my free style of talk, I promised her I would break myself of it and try to come up to her idea of a gentleman.”

“Her idea,” Alice said. “Who was she, pray, that she should presume to lecture you?”

“I tell you, there’s no need to be jealous,” Godfrey replied. “Not of her, at least. She is only a child,—not in ‘our set,’—no pretension,—no family,—though I believe she does boast a grandmother and forty pounds a year.”

“Oh, I know,—Gertie Rogers, that yellow-haired girl down at the cottage!” Alice exclaimed, with a tone of irritation in her voice.

“And so you have seen Gertie. Isn’t she a beauty?” Godfrey said.

Before Alice could reply there was the rustle of a dress and the sound of voices and footsteps on the stairs. The colonel and Edith were coming down, and they went into the drawing-room, where Godfrey and Alice joined them, the latter scanning the bride curiously, and mentally acknowledging her to be the most elegant woman she had ever seen, both in face, and manner, and dress. How exquisitely beautiful Edith was in the grayish silk, with the pink tinge, which fitted her fine form as only a Paris-made garment can fit. The silk was of the richest texture, while the lace upon it was in itself a fortune, and the bertha was the most exquisite thing of the kind Alice had ever seen.

“How can she be so easy and self-possessed, and she only a hired companion?” Alice thought, as she saw how wholly unembarrassed 188Edith was, even when Mrs. Rossiter swept into the room in her long trailing dress of black tissue, with her scarlet scarf around her, and a few geranium leaves in her hair.

Miss Rossiter usually wore black when in full dinner dress. She knew it became her better than any other color, especially when relieved with scarlet or white, and she was handsome now as she came in with a half-eager, half-wondering look upon her face.

“Ah, Christine, I am glad to see you and find you looking so well,” Col. Schuyler said, as he went hastily forward to meet her. “Let me present you to my wife. Mrs. Schuyler, this is Miss Rossiter, my sister,—or rather,—yes,—the sister of my wife; that is, I mean,—the late lamented Emily,—yes.”

“That’s what I call a very remarkable introduction,” Godfrey whispered to Alice, who turned away to hide her laughter, while the faintest resemblance of a smile lurked in Edith’s eyes and about the corners of her mouth as she extended her hand to the sister of the lamented Emily!

Otherwise she was perfectly collected, and did not seem to notice that only the tips of two fingers were given her, and that though the thin lips of Miss Rossiter moved, the words they uttered were wholly inaudible. Miss Rossiter had seen at a glance that the lady’s beauty was not exaggerated, but she could not feel altogether cordial toward one whom she considered an intruder, and she purposely threw as much coldness and haughtiness as possible into her manner, hoping thus to impress the stranger with a sense of the vast difference there was between the Rossiters and the Lyles. But Edith did not seem in the least affected by the lady’s hauteur, and inquiring kindly if her head was better, suggested that she sit down, as she must feel rather weak, and set the example by sitting down herself.

“If she is not assuming the rôle of mistress and patronizing me so soon,” was Miss Rossiter’s mental comment, and resolving not to be patronized she remained standing as straight as an arrow and almost as stiff, talking to her brother-in-law until the bell rang for dinner, and Julia and Emma came in, dressed in 189white and looking infinitely better than when Godfrey criticised them so severely.

The dining-room at Schuyler Hill was one of the pleasantest rooms in the house, and it looked beautifully now with its glass and silver and flowers, and Edith felt a pardonable glow of pride and satisfaction in the thought that this pleasant home, with all its luxury, was hers, the gift of the man who led her so proudly to her seat at the head of his table, and pressing her hand as he relinquished it and went back to his post of honor as master of the house. The colonel, who was inclined to be a little stiff in his manners among strangers, appeared well at home and especially well at his own table, and Edith, as she looked at him presiding with so much dignity and ease, thought what a handsome gentleman he was, and felt herself blessed in the possession of him.

CHAPTER XXVII.
AFTER DINNER.

hey had some music, Alice and Julia playing a duet, and then the latter sang and Godfrey turned the leaves for her and thought how dreadfully she screeched, and longed for her to finish and let Edith take her place. But Edith could not sing that night. There were too many memories of the past crowding into her mind, and at the very thought of singing she felt the iron hand touch her throat as if in warning.

“Thank you, Godfrey; some other time I shall be glad to sing, but not to-night. I am too tired, and if I may be excused, I will go to my room very soon,” she said, in reply to Godfrey’s urgent solicitation for a song.

She was very pale, and her husband came to her aid and said:

“Yes, Godfrey, Mrs. Schuyler must be excused; she is very weary, I see, and needs to rest. Shall I take you upstairs?”

He turned to Edith as he said the last words, and offering 190her his arm led her from the room, saying as he bade the ladies good-night that he should not return again that evening, as he had some letters and papers to look over in his reading room. Thus left to themselves the young people were free to talk, and Godfrey threw down the gauntlet by asking his aunt what she thought of his new mother.

“Isn’t she splendid?” he said. “And did you ever see a finer form than hers?”

“She is much better than I expected, and I am glad for the sake of my sister’s memory; had she been at all like your wicked insinuations I certainly should have died with grief.”

And then there followed another criticism upon Edith’s face, and form, and manners, and style, and antecedents,—the critics lingering longest over the latter, and insisting that Godfrey should be truthful and tell them what he knew. But Godfrey didn’t know anything except that she had once been a governess and was afterward the companion of their Aunt Sinclair, who esteemed her highly and was anxious for the match.

“Has she no relatives? Who are the Lyles?” Julia asked, and Godfrey answered:

“I don’t know who the Lyles are, I am sure. Her mother has been married twice, and is now a Mrs. Barrett, who takes lodgers in London,—a highly respectable looking woman, with puffs of gray hair. She is not at all like her daughter, and I don’t believe father fancied her much. That’s all I know; but I’ll tell you where you can get any information you wish concerning your step-grandmother. That Mrs. Rogers at the cottage,—my tenant, you know,—lodged with her for some months. Cultivate her a spell if you are anxious about Mrs. Schuyler’s pedigree.”

“Oh, yes,” Alice said; “we have cultivated her, and she is to do some plain sewing for me. Emma and I went down there yesterday and waited till she came home with a jug of molasses in one hand and a basket of eggs in the other, and that red-haired girl, her daughter, asked me to render some English into French for her. The idea of such people studying French! Girls, Godfrey thinks she’s a beauty; and don’t 191you believe, she presumed to lecture him for slang on the ship, and he kissed her!”

“Kissed whom,—Mrs. Rogers?” Julia asked in dismay, while Alice replied:

“No, the daughter, Gertie Rogers—the girl I told you about when I came home last night. She wears her hair down her back, and braids it up in tags at night and lets it out in the morning, to give it that wavy, rippling appearance.”

“No, she doesn’t!” Godfrey exclaimed. “It’s a natural wave. I’ll swear to that; for I saw her once brought on deck early in the morning, as sick as she could be, and I tell you it was just the same; and it is not red, either,—it is a beautiful auburn, with a shade of gold in it; and, as father says, she has the most remarkable face, for a child, that I ever saw.”

“Really, Godfrey, you are quite her champion. You’ll want us to invite her here next,” Julia said, while Emma ventured to remark:

“Anyway, she is beautiful; and do you know, I think there is a look in her face or eyes like Mrs. Schuyler. I thought of it to-night when we were at dinner.”

“That’s it!” Godfrey exclaimed. “I’ve tried and tried to think who Gertie was like. It’s Edith. There’s a resemblance; only Gertie will be the handsomer of the two when she is grown.”

“My dears,” Miss Rossiter began, in the tone she always assumed when displeased or grieved; “it seems to me your conversation is not very elevating. What possible interest can you feel in those people at the cottage? There can be nothing in common between us, even if they have the furniture of your poor mother’s room. Godfrey, I was very much hurt when you wrote Perry to take dear Emily’s bedstead and bureau down there. Suppose they were old, they were very dear to me, and I would gladly have had them in my room. The bedstead is much handsomer than the one I’m sleeping on now, and should be sacred to us because your mother and my sister died on it.”

Miss Rossiter’s handkerchief was at her eyes, and her voice 192trembled as she spoke. But Godfrey did not reply at once, and when he did, he said:

“I did not suppose you’d care to have that bedstead in your room, or you should have had it. Perhaps I can manage it yet.”

“No, no, I beg; let it be as it is. I can bear it,” Miss Rossiter said, with the air of a martyr, while all the time she knew that no amount of money could induce her to sleep on a bed where she had seen a person die.

She would not confess that she was superstitious, but she was, and until this moment, when the desire to find fault with something was strong within her, it had never occurred to her that she wanted the furniture for her own use. She merely did not wish it removed for her sister’s successor. If it had been good enough for a Rossiter it surely was good enough for Edith Lyle, and in addition to all this, it hurt her to know that common people like Mrs. Rogers and her daughter were to stretch their democratic bodies on a bed where Emily’s aristocratic limbs had once reposed. With her handkerchief to her eyes there fell a chill on the spirits of the young people, who sat silent until Godfrey said, suddenly:

“By the way, girls, I’ve not told you a word about Bob Macpherson, the artist. I meant to bring him up with me, but he was so much absorbed in the galleries and studios that he decided to wait a little. You are sure to like him.”

“Where did you pick him up?” Julia asked; and Godfrey replied:

“In Rome. I wrote about it at the time. He is an artist from pure love of it rather than necessity, for he has money enough and comes of a good Scotch family.”

“Didn’t you write us there was a title in it?” Julia asked.

“Yes; but several removes from Bob, though. I fancied that his father married beneath him, for Bob never says a word about his friends on the maternal side. He went to see them, though, up in Scotland somewhere, and when he came to Oakwood he was awful blue and silent for days, and doubtful about coming to America, but he got over that. He wants to paint 193some of our American views, and surely he could not select a better point on the Hudson than Hampstead. I hope he will come soon. I’m lost without him.”

What Godfrey liked he liked heartily, and he went on lauding Robert Macpherson until his hearers grew tired of it and asked him to talk of something else.

Meantime Edith had gone to her room, where her husband left her while he looked over the letters and documents which had been accumulating for a week or more. As he went out Norah came in to attend her mistress.

“Get me my dressing-gown and brushes, and then you can go. I shall not need you any more. I am going to sit up awhile,” Edith said; and after her maid was gone she arose, and walking to the long mirror, stood looking at the image it revealed of a beautiful lady, clad in heavy silk, with jewels on neck and arms and in her shining hair.

And then her thoughts went backward to the time, years before, when a strange vision had come to her, of herself as she was now clad in costly array, and the mistress of Schuyler Hill. Then her heart had been breaking with a sense of desolation and dread; now it was swelling with pride and happiness, even though that happiness was mingled with regret when she remembered the past and the dead youth whose grave was just across the lawn where the monument was showing so plainly in the moonlight.

And yet she was very happy, and had been so ever since her feet touched the soil of America. She had seen everything in New York which was worth seeing at that season of the year,—had driven with her husband and with Godfrey and with Robert Macpherson in the park, and had been pointed out as the handsomest woman there. She had shopped at Arnold’s and Stewart’s and Tiffany’s, and lunched at Delmonico’s, and dined at Mr. Calvert’s, and stood on the very spot her feet had touched that day when Abelard was made her husband. But no one had suspected her in the least, and Mrs. Calvert, who was a good-natured little woman, had accepted her in good faith as an entire stranger to America and its ways, and patronized her accordingly.

194And it was just here that Edith’s conscience gave her a great deal of trouble. When the Calverts and her husband and Godfrey talked to her of America as of a place wholly new to her, she felt herself a miserable impostor, and there was at first a dull pain in her heart as she thought of living on and on with this hidden secret, as she had made up her mind to do.

But gradually this feeling began to give way, and when at last she left New York and started for her country home, she was very happy, even though there was underlying her happiness a feeling of unrest, a feverish desire to see the cottage once more and the grave on the hill, where the evergreens were growing.

How different was this arrival at Hampstead from what the first had been. Then Abelard had stood upon the platform in his working dress, for he had not had time to change it, and with her mother she had walked up the long hill and round through Mountain Avenue to the cottage which was to be their home. Now in place of Abelard, a liveried coachman stood waiting for her, while another servant in livery handed her to the carriage, and both bowed respectfully when their master said:

“The air is so pure and the day so fine I think we will take the longest route home, and drive through Mountain Avenue.”

That was the road which led straight by the cottage door, and Edith’s heart had beaten rapidly as they drew near the turn in the street which would bring the cottage in view, and when at last she saw it, the blood surged swiftly through her heart, and her hands were clasped tightly together as she looked eagerly at what had once been her home. It was not greatly changed, except that it had recently been repainted, while the creeper, which when she lived there had just commenced fastening its little fibrous fingers to the clapboards, now covered two sides of it entirely, and made its present name, Vine Cottage, very appropriate.

There was her old room, and the window was open just as it used to be, and the honeysuckle was framed around it, and an open book was lying in it, together with a child’s work-box. It had had an occupant then, and who, she asked herself, forgetting 195Mary Rogers, until her eye caught sight of Gertie Westbrooke, whose bouquet of daisies and forget-me-nots fell directly in her lap and seemed a welcome to her. Then she remembered having heard from Godfrey that Mrs. Rogers was to be his tenant, and she knew this child with the bright flowing hair and eager face must be the same whose “God bless you” had been the only “God bless you” given her at her bridal.

“It is very strange,” she thought, “that this little unknown child should always cross my path with flowers and blessings and welcomes;” and she turned her head to look again at the two figures gazing after her.

If a thought that the elder of the two was Ettie Armstrong crossed her mind, I cannot tell. Probably not, as she was thinking of the cottage and the child and the bouquet, which she put in water as soon as the meeting with her husband’s family was over, and she was alone with Norah in her room, and as she turned from the window and saw them she unlocked a square ebony box, which her maid, in unpacking, had taken from her trunk. Inside this was another box, a little old-fashioned thing of painted wood, with Chinese figures on it. Abelard had bought it for her on Sixth Avenue, and she had made it a receptacle for her first wedding ring, and a lock of Abelard’s hair and the blood-stained rose which had been found next to his heart and brought her by Phebe Young. There, too, as a safe repository, she had put Gertie’s first bouquet, with the “God bless you” in it, and there she now put the second one, her welcome to Hampstead. Why she put these flowers with the sacred mementoes of Abelard she did not know, nor did she question her motive, but said to herself, “I must make that little girl’s acquaintance;” and then, donning her white dressing-gown she went to the window, from which a view of the cottage could be had, with the moonlight falling on it, just as it used to fall years ago when she was a poor obscure girl, with no thought that she should one day stand as she was standing now, the mistress of Schuyler Hill, with every possible luxury at her command. And there, too, in her old room was the glimmer of a lamp, and a little figure moved occasionally before the open window, 196Gertie, most probably, preparing for bed, for after a little the light disappeared, and Edith found herself wondering if the child was kneeling by her bedside and saying her prayer.

“Yes, I am sure she is praying,” she thought, “and perhaps she prays for me. I wish she would, for unless she does there is no one to pray for me now in all the wide, wide world.”

Oh! how unspeakably terrible was that thought: “Nobody to pray for me in all the wide, wide world.”

She had lost faith in her mother’s prayers, and, as a consequence, her own heart and feelings had insensibly grown harder. But they were softening now, and as she stood looking into the moonlight, she clasped her hands involuntarily, and whispered to herself:

“Oh, Father in heaven, help me from this hour to be a better woman than ever I’ve been before.”

There was a step behind her, and in a moment her husband’s arm stole round her waist, and her husband’s voice said, as playfully as Colonel Schuyler could say:

“Ah! Edith, my darling, moon-gazing, are you? What do you think of the view, and your new home, and can you be happy in it with me?”

Colonel Schuyler’s love and admiration for his wife had been steadily increasing ever since the morning when he first called her his own, and if there had been in his mind a lingering doubt as to the wisdom of his choice, it had been dispelled by the sight of her in her evening dress, sitting at his table, and performing her duties so gracefully and in a quiet, matter of course way, as if she had sat there all her life, with that array of silver, and cut glass, and flowers before her.

How fair, and self-possessed, and ladylike she was, and how the pink coral and the soft lace trimmings of her gray dress became her, and how proud he was of her, as he watched her in the drawing-room, talking to his daughters and Miss Creighton, who, compared with her, lost fearfully in the balance of beauty, and grace, and culture.

Usually in the olden days, when Emily trailed her silken robes over the costly carpets, or reclined in her easy-chair, or 197reposed upon the couch, he had found the atmosphere of the parlors a little tiresome, and had seized the earliest opportunity for stealing away to his private room. But now it was different, and only the knowing that his letters must be read had availed to take him from Edith’s side; and even while he sat reading them his thoughts were with her continually, and hurrying through them as soon as possible he joined her as we have seen. Pausing a moment in the door he looked admiringly at her as she stood in the deep window with her white dressing-gown falling in graceful folds around her, and her brown hair rippling over her shoulders. She was beautiful, and she was his, and he loved her, and fain would know if she was happy, so he asked her the question, “What do you think of your new home, and can you be happy in it with me?”

“Yes, Howard, very happy;” and Edith’s hand stole into his, and her fair head drooped upon his shoulder as she continued: “It is a beautiful place, and I am glad you brought me to it, that when you came in just now and surprised me as you did, I was thanking God for it, and asking Him to make me worthy of it. Howard, do you ever pray?”

It was a singular question, and it sent the hot blood quickly to Colonel Schuyler’s face, while a feeling of shame and remorse took possession of him. Years ago he had with other young men of his age been confirmed as a matter of course, and because it was the right thing to do, but he had never reaped any benefits from the confirmation, or given heed to that without which the laying on of hands is of no avail. When Emily died, and he saw what religion could do for her, he set about trying to work out his salvation himself, and by acts alone. Every feast and fast day was for a time observed, while he gave largely to the church and the poor, and insisted that his daughter should be confirmed, and expressed a wish that Godfrey would do so, too. But Godfrey answered “No.” He was not going to renounce the world, the flesh and the devil, he said, when he liked them first-rate, and should lie if he said he didn’t! So Godfrey was given up, but the colonel saw his daughters confirmed, and encouraged them in their Sunday-school teaching, 198and never allowed them to read light literature on Sunday if he knew it. He asked a blessing at the table, the shortest he could find; kept the Sabbath day strictly, so far as dinners, and drives, and company were concerned: but there was nothing real about it, nothing which in the other world would have weighed a straw with Him through whom alone we go to God, and when Edith startled him with the question, “Do you ever pray?” he answered her truthfully, “Not often, no.”

“Then let us begin now,” and Edith held his hand in both hers. “I’ve never prayed either as I ought, but I’ve been thinking about it, and I’ve so much to be thankful for, and need help so much to make me what I should be. Let us begin together, to-night.”

He could not resist her, and there in the moonlight, with their faces toward Emily’s grave and Abelard s, they knelt down side by side; and though the Lord’s Prayer was all they said, it was praying just the same, and God heard and blessed them, for He knew the wish there was in their hearts, and sent to Edith at least the peace she so desired. And so, with a great happiness and feeling of rest and quiet in her heart, she laid her head upon her pillow, and sleep fell softly upon her in her new home at Schuyler Hill.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
ONE DAY IN HAMPSTEAD.

dith was very sweet and beautiful in her white cambric dress when she descended to the breakfast-room next morning, and took her seat at the table. Miss Rossiter was not present. She had not slept at all for thinking of poor Emily, she said, and was suffering from the combined effects of brandy and morphine and headache, and had her coffee in her room, and felt as if she was resenting something, she hardly knew what, and that if ever there was a martyr she was one now.

199The young ladies, however, were all present, and looking very bright and cheerful as they bade Edith good-morning. Alice’s hair had gone down a story or two, and was arranged as nearly as possible like Mrs. Schuyler’s. Indeed, Miss Alice had risen a full hour earlier than her usual custom in order to try her talent for hair-dressing, and had succeeded so well that Godfrey, for whom the sacrifice was made, called her a nice little puss after all, and tolerably good-looking, too. And Alice felt complimented and thought Godfrey very handsome, and buttered his cakes for him and seemed altogether like a woman of twenty-five, who had been engaged for years.

“Well, girls, what are you going to do to pass the time between this and dinner?” Godfrey asked, as he rose from the table.

“I must go and see about the sewing I gave to Rogers, and you can go too and see your beauty if you like,” Alice said, and with a comical look Godfrey repeated:

“Rogers,—Rogers? Who is he?”

“Why, your tenant,—the woman who lives in your cottage. She is doing some work for me,” Alice replied, and Godfrey rejoined:

“Oh, oui, je vous comprends. It’s the height of good breeding to call your inferiors by their last names; so then, Creighton, let’s go and see Rogers!” and with a tremendous shake of his pants, Godfrey took his soft hat and bamboo cane from the hall rack, and started with Alice for the cottage.

It was Saturday, and as there was no school, Gertie was working in the garden with a big sun-hat tied under her chin, her hair falling down her back, her cheeks very red and her hands very much soiled with dirt. It was a bother to wear gloves, she thought, and she was tugging away at a tuft of pinks when she heard the gate, and looking up saw Alice and Godfrey coming up the walk. Quickly dropping her pinks she went forward to meet them, her eyes shining like stars as she said to Godfrey:

“Oh, Mr. Godfrey, I am so glad to see you. I did not know you had come. Excuse me from shaking hands. I can’t, 200you see;” and she held up her little soiled hands which looked white and pretty even with the dirt upon them.

“Upon my word, I never saw such assurance. Why, she acts as if she was fully his equal,” Alice thought, as with great dignity she asked:

“Is your mother in? I came to see her about the work I sent her last night.”

Mrs. Rogers was in, and while Miss Creighton gave her minute directions as to the precise number and size of the tucks and ruffles and puffs, Gertie entertained Godfrey outside by telling him all about herself since coming to Hampstead. She was going to school to Miss Armstrong, whom she liked so much, and she was studying French, and had caught up with the class already, and Miss Armstrong said her accent was very pure.

“You see I took lessons six months in London of a native, and that makes a difference,” she said; “and, oh, Mr. Godfrey, do you know where we can rent a piano, I want one so much so as to commence my music. You know I am to be a teacher like Miss Armstrong, and take care of auntie when she is old.”

Godfrey promised to make inquiries for a piano, and then suddenly recollecting himself, exclaimed:

“Why, there is that old one of mother’s at home, a rattle-trap of a thing, which all the Rossiters must have thrummed since the flood. You can have that if it will answer.”

Gertie did not think it would. She had no fancy for a “rattle-trap which all the dead Rossiters had thrummed;” she preferred an instrument which sounded decently, and she said so, and added:

“But we’ve nowhere to put one yet. Oh, Mr. Godfrey, what made anybody send that tall bedstead and bureau down here, where they won’t stand up in any of our sleeping-rooms? We had to put the bureau in the parlor, and the bedstead is still in the woodshed. I wish somebody would take it away. I think it is awful, so clumsy, and I fell over it this morning and hurt my foot.”

Godfrey laughed aloud, not at Gertie, but at what Miss Rossiter 201would say could she hear this little plebeian denounce that bedstead as awful and clumsy, and wish it away even from the woodshed! Miss Rossiter had been greatly wounded on account of that bedstead; Miss Rossiter had cried because it was sent to the cottage; she had expressed a wish to have it for her own, and her wish should be gratified.

“It was absurd to send that tall furniture to these low rooms,” Godfrey said, “and I’ll see that it is taken away; to-day, perhaps. Did it hurt your foot very much?”

“Oh no, not much; it was this one,” and Gertie stuck up her little foot, which even in the half-worn boot looked so small and pretty that Godfrey felt a desire to squeeze it in his hand.

But Miss Creighton was coming out, and he straightened himself up and nibbled quite unconcernedly at the end of his cane, while Alice gave a few last directions with regard to her plain sewing.

“Good-by, Gertie,” Godfrey said. “I’ll send for the bedstead and inquire about the piano, and I have not used a single slang word this morning, have I? I shall be a perfect gentleman very soon, and then——” he kissed his hand to her, and looking back Alice saw a hot flush on the face of the child, who knew as well as Godfrey to what he alluded.

“What do you mean by being so familiar with such people?” Alice asked. “It cannot do them any good. On the contrary, it is a positive harm. Why, Rogers is so airy now I can hardly talk with her.”

“Allie, if you want me to like you, don’t be a fool,” Godfrey said, sharply. “I don’t wonder the woman was what you call airy, which means that she stood for her rights. I heard you call her ‘Rogers’ to her face. Now that is simply absurd for Americans. In England it is more common and means nothing; but here, where there is no aristocracy of blood, and the son of the hod-carrier may rise to be President, it is ridiculous, and savors wonderfully of snobbishness and parvenuism. If this woman has a handle to her name, give it to her, and not call her ‘Rogers.’ It is low, and not a bit ladylike, and you, 202as Alice Creighton, can certainly afford to be a lady without taking the trouble to impress others with your rank.”

Godfrey was very much in earnest, and Alice was crying, and so the walk home was a most uncomfortable one, until they reached the entrance to the grounds, where Godfrey stopped, and putting his hand playfully on his companion’s shoulder, said:

“Come, Allie, don’t let’s quarrel. You are a nice little thing and I like you first-rate, and want you to be a lady everywhere, and have a kind, courteous word for everybody; Mrs. Schuyler has, and she——”

“Mrs. Schuyler, indeed! As if I am to take her for a pattern, and she a governess!” Alice said hotly, as she walked rapidly on toward the house.

“Whe-w!” Godfrey whistled after her as he followed leisurely, wondering why girls need to make such confounded fools of themselves, and half wishing he had held his tongue and not tried to lecture Alice.

As he drew near the house he saw John, the coachman, bringing up the pony phaeton, and asked who was going out.

“Miss Rossiter is going up to the Ridge House after lunch, and wants to drive herself,” said John, and Godfrey thought within himself:

“That’s just the thing, and gives me a chance to surprise her. Won’t it be a capital joke?”

Entering the house he went in quest of his aunt, who was dressed and feeling much better.

“Mrs. Barton has asked me to come over there some day, and I believe I’ll go this afternoon. Home does not seem like home now,” she said, with a sigh, which Godfrey knew had reference to the graceful figure walking on the terrace in front of the window, and so did not respond at once.

When he did speak, he said:

“By the way, auntie, were you really in earnest about that bedstead?”

“What bedstead?” Miss Rossiter asked quickly, and then recollecting herself, she added: “Certainly I was. It hurt me 203cruelly to see it leave the house when Emily thought so much of it. But then I must get accustomed to things of that kind, I suppose. New lords, new laws, and new things.”

Her manner was the manner of one who has been wounded and thwarted at every point, and Godfrey was strengthened in his resolve, and within half an hour after she had driven away in her pony phaeton he had interviewed both Mrs. Tiffe and Perry, and was riding with John in the long democratic wagon down the road toward the cottage. Mrs. Rogers and Gertie were both in the garden this time, but when Godfrey explained his errand, the former, who was glad to be rid of the cumbrous piece of furniture, went in with John, while Godfrey remained outside with Gertie.

“You must be very fond of gardening,” he said, and Gertie replied:

“Yes, I am; I like it ever so much. Have you seen the grave since you came home?”

“Grave! Whose grave?” Godfrey asked, and she replied:

“Mr. Lyle’s, the man who saved your life. Miss Armstrong told me all about it, and I felt so glad you were not killed, and so sorry for him and the young girl who liked him. She used to live here in this very house, and Miss Armstrong promised her, when she went away, to keep the grave up nice till she came back, and for a while she did, but the girl didn’t come, and Miss Armstrong got to forgetting it, you know, and when she told me about it, it was just awful with weeds and tangled grass. But it looks like a flower-bed now. I thought maybe you would be glad.”

Her bright, eager eyes were fixed upon him for his approval, which he gave unqualifiedly.

“He was glad, and to-morrow, after dinner, he would go and see it,” he said; and then as his services were needed for the heavy bureau, he lifted his hat to Gertie, and walked away.

“For pity’s sake, what are you doing?” Julia asked of Godfrey, when, after her nap and toilet, she came from her room and found the rear of the hall blockaded with furniture, and 204mattress, and bed-clothes, and Godfrey, very red in the face as he assisted Mrs. Tiffe, who was also anxious and excited.

“Cooking some ‘potted sprats’ I guess, though I’m not quite sure,” was Godfrey’s reply; and when Julia, who was not very conversant with Mrs. Opie, demanded what he meant, he explained that as Aunt Christine was so grieved about the things sent to the cottage, and expressed herself as so desirous to have them back, especially the bedstead, he had decided to give her a pleasant surprise on her return that night from the Ridge. “Won’t she be delighted though!” And Godfrey’s face was very expressive as he tugged away at the heavy furniture. “There, she is sure to like that,” he said, when at last his work was finished, and the old fashioned, massive bedstead stood in the place the lighter one of oak had occupied, while the bureau was pushed into a corner as the only available spot.

“I am glad you are so well satisfied,” Julia said; “but I doubt if you get any thanks for your trouble. Auntie will never sleep a night on that bedstead; she is the biggest coward in the world.”

“Then I’ll take it down Monday. Anyway, she cannot say I have not tried to please her,” was Godfrey’s reply, as he walked away, whistling cheerily, and wondering why women were so queer, and always went back on a fellow when he was doing his best.

Meantime Alice had had her pet out in a good cry, which made her nose very red, and did not add at all to the beauty of her face when she came down to dinner, gracious and smiling, and ready to forgive Godfrey, if he wished to be forgiven. But he gave no sign that he did, though he was very polite to her, and peeled her orange, and gave her his bunch of Malaga grapes, because he knew she had a weakness for them, and asked her slyly how she had burned her nose so badly, and suggested a very small poultice of flaxseed when she went to bed at night! And Alice laughed, and thought him altogether charming and delightful.

“I mean to show him that I am improving in what he calls snobbishness,” she thought, and after dinner was over, she said to him in her most insinuating voice:

205“Godfrey, I want to see Mrs. Rogers again. I’ve changed my mind about the tucks. I heard you say you were going to the village, and would you mind walking round that way for me when you come home?”

“Certainly not. I am pleased to go to Mrs. Rogers’ at any time,” he answered, with an emphasis on the Mrs., which showed that he had taken note of the change.

“Pleased to go there at any time! I do believe it, and I wonder if he can be so much interested in that child,” Alice thought, as she walked slowly toward the cottage.

She was not jealous. Gertie was too young and too obscure for that; but she was annoyed with Godfrey’s evident admiration for the “yellow-haired girl.” And still, if she would please him as she really wished to do, she must be interested, too, and after she was through with Mrs. Rogers she went out to Gertie, and, wishing to say something to her, asked abruptly if she had ever been confirmed? Alice always felt more seriously inclined on Saturday afternoons than on any other week day. It was near to Sunday, and became one who taught in the Mission school, and gave all sorts of good advice to sundry forlorn, ragged little wretches, among whom Godfrey Schuyler and Schuyler Godfrey and Alice Creighton Vandeusenhisen figured conspicuously. Alice would never have taught in the regular Sunday-school, where she was liable to come in contact with persons who might lay claim to her notice socially. She preferred the Mission school, where she was looked upon as something far above the common order of mortals, and here she was very zealous, and very devout, and very good, and sometimes took Alice Creighton Vandeusenhisen in her lap, and let Tommie Trotter stroke her silk dress with his dirty hands, and once she actually kissed a little girl who brought her a bouquet. To these children, and such as these, she and the Misses Schuyler, who taught there also, were kind of divinities, as was proven by an incident which occurred just before the arrival of Edith at the Hill. There was a new rector at St. Luke’s,—a young man fresh from old Trinity in New York,—and he went one Sunday to catechise the little ones at the Mission.

206“Now boys,” he said to the row of eager faces confronting him so eagerly, “speak up loud and tell me who made the world?”

Instantly Tommie Trotter, with the three Vandeusenhisens, screamed lustily:

“Miss Alice Creighton, sir!” and were answered from a rival crowd:

“Miss Julia Schuyler, sir!” while one faint little voice brought up the rear with:

“I tell you, Tom Trotter, she didn’t. ’Twas Miss Emma, sir!”

After that Alice and Julia esteemed themselves as saints, and were more zealous than ever to gather in any stray lambs which had no particular fold. Hence the reason for Alice’s attack on Gertie, whom she startled with the question:

“Have you ever been confirmed?”

Gertie had not, and did not particularly care to be just yet, she said; and Alice was as much shocked and surprised as if the child had been convicted of a crime.

“Not wish to be confirmed and be good! How shocking!” she exclaimed.

And Gertie replied:

“I did not say I did not wish to be good, for I do; but I don’t want to be confirmed until I am older and understand it better.”

“Who is your teacher in Sunday-school?” Alice asked next, with a good deal of severity.

“I don’t go to Sunday-school. I get my lesson at home, and recite it with the Collect and the Commandments to Auntie,” Gertie said, while Miss Creighton grew more and more amazed.

“Not go to Sunday-school! I did not suppose there was any one in this town so heathenish as that! Child, you must go, and, if you do not care to join the school at church, come to the Mission to-morrow at four o’clock. You will find me there, and the Misses Schuyler and several other ladies. Will you come?”

Gertie hesitated a moment, and then asked:

207“Has Mr. Godfrey a class?”

“Mr. Godfrey a class! Certainly not. Can’t you go unless he is there?” Alice said, sharply, conscious of a sudden feeling, which, had Gertie been her equal, would have been jealousy.

Ere Gertie could reply, there was the sound of a low chuckle in the direction of the street, and, looking round, Alice saw Godfrey leaning over the gate with a most comical expression on his face.

He had heard nearly all the conversation, and said to Alice:

“Beating up recruits for the Mission school, are you, Alice? Don’t you go there, Gertie. You are too big and too good-looking, and the room smells awful. She got me down there once, and made me hear a class, and the little imps swapped jack-knives, and fought each other, and called me ‘old Schuyler’ behind my back, and wondered what business I had trying to teach the Commandments. No, Gertie, go to the other school if you must go somewhere, and I suppose you must, or lose caste with this young lady. Why, she’s as zealous as the Pope himself with regard to her church and her school. But come, Allie, it is time to go.”

And, opening the gate, he held it, while with a barely civil nod to Gertie, Miss Creighton passed out into the street, and, taking Godfrey’s offered arm, walked away, leaving Gertie to look after her and wonder if Mr. Godfrey liked her and meant to marry her some day, and if it was wrong not to be confirmed when she was only twelve years old, and heathenish not to go to Sunday-school when she did not wish to, and could say her lesson at home.

Miss Rossiter had spent a very pleasant afternoon with her friend Mrs. Barton, at the Ridge House, and enjoyed herself famously in talking of the bride, whom she never could like, she said, even though she must confess that her personal appearance was in her favor.

“That was all a hoax about her being lame and old. Godfrey wrote it to tease us,” she said. “She cannot be more than thirty-five, and really has some claim to good looks, while 208her manners are not bad. But she is an adventuress,—a poor governess, and nothing more; and she has taken dear Emily’s place, and everything must give way to her, and our pleasant home is broken up forever. And Miss Rossiter cried a little as she told of the furniture, which had been sent from the house as not good enough for “my lady,” when I would have liked it so much for the memories clustering about it,—the very bed poor Emily died on, and I saw her, too!”

Miss Rossiter sobbed aloud, while Mrs. Barton tried to comfort her, and said it was hard, and that, if it would be any comfort to her dear friend, she would not call upon the intruder, or let her daughter Rosamond call either.

That would be some consolation, for Mrs. Grey Barton, of the Ridge House, was a sort of queen in the neighborhood since Lady Emily died, and a slight from her was sure to be felt; so Miss Rossiter allowed herself to be comforted, and, after dinner, drove herself home in the soft, autumnal twilight.

Edith was standing on the piazza when she came up the steps, and asked if she had spent a pleasant day.

“Yes, it is always pleasant at the Ridge. Mrs. Barton is considered the first lady in the town,” Miss Rossiter replied, as she swept proudly up the stairs, feeling that by enlightening Edith with regard to Mrs. Barton’s standing she was preparing her to feel the slight about to be offered her.

It was not light enough in her room for her to see anything distinctly when she entered it, and she laid aside her hat and shawl and turned up the gas before she observed the change. Then she started and looked again, and rubbed her eyes, and wondered if she were threatened with softening of the brain, as she had sometimes feared, and saw things which existed only in her imagination. No, there was no fancy here. The airy, graceful bedstead of oak and black walnut, which she had left there that morning, was gone, and in its place loomed the huge, old-fashioned thing, on which she would not sleep for the world. For a moment she stood, wondering what she should do.

“Hallo, auntie, what’s the matter? Don’t you like it? You are white as a sheet,” came cheerily from Godfrey, who 209was sauntering down the hall “You see I thought I’d surprise you, and I worked like a beaver to get it set up. It’s all right, I hope.”

“Yes, Godfrey, yes,” Miss Rossiter gasped. “It was kind in you, but—but——”

“But what, auntie? It is not a potted sprat, I hope. You told me that story, you know, and illustrated it, too, when I didn’t want to go to school, and said I was sick, and you made me lie in bed all day and take those nasty squills. Don’t you really want it in there?”

“No, Godfrey. I thought I did, but I guess I don’t. I’m silly, and nervous, and all unstrung with trouble, and I can see my poor sister so plain. You know she died on it. I should not sleep a wink, and I—I—oh, Godfrey,—oh, Godfrey,—take it away, do, please, there is a good boy!”

She was crying a little and trembling a great deal, and as Godfrey never could resist tears, he promised readily, and passing his arm playfully around her waist, drew her into the room, and said:

“All right, let’s go at it now. You ring the bell and I’ll pull it to pieces.”

It did not take long to undo the work of the morning, and the obnoxious bedstead, which nobody seemed to want, was soon stored away in the attic, while, with the help of a little morphine and an electric shock heavier than usual, Miss Rossiter slept tolerably well that night, and dreamed of eating all the “potted sprats” served up in Mrs. Opie’s “white lies.”

CHAPTER XXIX.
THE FIRST SUNDAY IN HAMPSTEAD.

here was a great crowd at church that first Sunday after Mrs. Schuyler’s arrival in town. Perhaps it was the brightness of the day, and perhaps it was an unconfessed desire to see the bride, of whose personal appearance so many conflicting rumors were afloat. I was early at church 210myself, and felt nervous and excited when I knew that the Schuyler carriage had stopped at the door, and that I should soon see again the beautiful woman who had interested me so greatly. The Morrises, and Beechers, and Montgomeries, and Bartons from the Ridge, and indeed all the great families of the neighborhood, were already in their seats, and had said their prayers, and found their places, and arranged themselves comfortably and becomingly when the Schuylers came in, the colonel and his bride, with Godfrey and the young ladies following after. Edith’s dress was very plain and simple, a rich black silk, with some kind of a gauzy white scarf around her shoulders and a white chip bonnet, with lace and blue ribbons; and yet she was very elegant, as with eyes cast down and a flush on her cheek she walked up the aisle and took her seat in the Schuyler pew. There was perfect silence during the moment she was on her knees, but when she rose and threw a swift, curious glance about her we recovered ourselves and were ready for the “dearly beloved,” which I doubt if Edith heard, though she rose to her feet and let our village dressmaker, who sat behind, see just how the back of her skirt was trimmed.

Edith was not thinking of the solemn service in which she joined involuntarily, nor of the many eyes turned upon her, but of the Sundays years ago, when she was a worshipper in that same house, though not in that pew, crimson cushioned and velvet carpeted, but in the humbler seat farther back, where now by some chance little Gertie sat, her blue eyes fixed upon the bride, and her face wearing an expression of perfect content, as if she understood the general impression the lady had made.

Miss Rossiter was not there. She had told Mrs. Barton not to expect her. It would be too great a strain upon her nerves to see that doll in Emily’s place, with everybody looking at her, and some admiring her, as no doubt they would. She had called her “a doll,” and Mrs. Barton was prepared for a pink-and-white expressionless creature, with some claims to good looks, and an unmistakably lower-class air about her, but she was not prepared for this superb beauty, who took her breath 211away, and made her mentally revoke her promise not to call or notice her in any way. It would not do to slight that woman, who would lead Hampstead, and New York, too, if she tried, and Mrs. Barton did not propose to do it. She would rather run the risk of offending Miss Rossiter; and when at last church was out, and they were waiting for the carriages outside the door, she managed to get introduced, and presented her daughter Rosamond, who, for the remainder of the day, raved about the beauty and grace and style of Mrs. Schuyler. Little Gertie half stopped as if to claim acquaintance, but Mary Rogers led her away, and I saw the child look back several times at the lady, to whom she had not yet spoken, and whom she was to meet first at the grave of Abelard Lyle.

Godfrey had said to her, “I must go to the grave to-morrow after dinner,” and as she wished to water the flowers and root up any weed which might have come to sight since her last visit, she resolved to be there before him and enjoy his surprise. She knew dinner at Schuyler Hill was served at two o’clock on Sundays, and as Godfrey was not likely to get out before three she had plenty of time, and after her own early dinner started for the cemetery.

There was not much to be done, for the grave was like a pretty flower-bed, and after pulling a weed or two, and digging around a heliotrope, she sat down to rest at the foot of the monument.

Gertie was rather tired, and the day was warm and Godfrey long in coming, and at last she fell asleep with her head against the marble, and did not hear the sound of footsteps on the grassy path which led across the lawn to the yard.

Some one was coming, but it was not Godfrey. He was sitting with Alice upon the balcony, and asking her if she expected a new pupil at the Mission that afternoon, and if she’d like him to go with her. Colonel Schuyler was taking his Sunday nap in his easy-chair, and thus left to herself Edith had resolved upon a visit to the grave, toward which she had looked so many times since her arrival at Schuyler Hill. Only once before had she been in that yard, and that when she planted the rosebush which 212now twined about the monument, and made a screen from the sun for the little girl sleeping so sweetly there.

How beautiful she was, and Edith paused a moment to look at her, wondering who she was, and then concluding from the hair that it must be Gertie Westbrooke, who had thrown her the bouquet. Entering the yard she went close to the grave, marvelling to find it in such perfect order, and feeling a sense of suffocation when she saw the vase she had given Ettie Armstrong full of freshly-gathered flowers, which seemed to speak to her so plainly from the dead. Who had done this, as if in welcome to her? Was there any one in Hampstead who suspected her identity?

“Impossible,” she said to herself, as she sat down upon the iron chair which stood near the grave. “It is very strange, and this child here too asleep. What a beautiful face she has, and who is it she resembles?” Edith thought, as she marked the regular features, the transparent complexion, the long silken lashes and the glossy auburn hair of the unconscious child.

How plump and pretty were the hands which lay, one on her lap, and the other on the green sward beside her, where it had fallen in the abandonment of sleep. How small, too, and perfectly formed were the little feet, and Edith wondered to see them encased in such dainty boots, just as she wondered at the whole appearance of the child who interested and fascinated her so much.

“I wish she would awake. I’d like to talk with her,” she thought, and as if the wish had communicated itself to Gertie, the long lashes lifted slowly, disclosing a pair of eyes so bright and blue and lovely in their expression, that Edith half started, and thought, with a pang, of eyes she had seen years ago, but which now were closed forever and laid away beneath the turf at her feet.

Gertie was quite awake now, and a sweet smile broke over her face and showed itself in her very eyes when she saw who was with her.

“Oh, Mrs. Schuyler,” she said, advancing at once and without the least timidity toward the lady. “Oh, Mrs. Schuyler, 213it’s you. I was waiting for Godfrey, and went to sleep and had such a nice dream of mother, who was alive, I thought, and father too.”

She was standing close to Edith, who, reaching out her hand, took Gertie’s in it, and forgetting that Mrs. Rogers was not the child’s own mother, said, in some surprise:

“Your mother is not dead!”

“Yes, she is,” Gertie replied. “She died when I was a little tiny girl, and father married again and Auntie Rogers took me away, and then father died, too, in Italy. Is not Mr. Godfrey coming to see the grave? he said he would yesterday.”

She was more intent on Godfrey than on her parentage, and, at her mention of the grave, Edith asked, quickly:

“What grave is Godfrey coming to see?”

“This one,” and Gertie pointed to the flower-bed where the vase was standing. “You see,” she continued, “this is Mr. Lyle’s grave,—Mr. James A. Lyle, who died in saving Mr. Godfrey’s life. He was working on the tower of the house at Schuyler Hill, and Mr. Godfrey was a little boy, and climbed up and slipped, and Mr. Lyle caught him, and threw him where he was safe, but fell himself down—down—down—to the very earth, where he was smashed all to bits, and they took him up as dead as dead could be!”

Gertie was very eloquent and earnest, and emphasized her “down—down—down” with a wave of her hand in the air and a stamp of her foot upon the ground, while Edith, who could not speak for the fingers at her throat, sat gazing at her, motionless and completely fascinated by her face, and manner, and voice, which last had in it the ring of something familiar,—something heard years ago, when she was young and listened to the bell in the old church-tower ringing on a Sunday morning. When she could speak, she asked:

“How did you learn all this, and who keeps the grave so nicely?”

“I do; for you see Miss Armstrong,—that’s my teacher, she was at church to-day, and plays the organ,—she came here with me one time, and, when I asked about the graves, she told me 214whose they were,—that is, the newest ones. That great, tall stone is the first Mrs. Schuyler; but you don’t care for that. She was not half as pretty as you, they say, and so he had to get her this grand stone, which cost two or three thousand dollars. I dote on graves, and like to hear about them, and Miss Armstrong told me about this poor boy, or man he must have been, for he was a young girl’s beau, I guess.”

“A what?” Edith gasped. And Gertie went on:

“There was a beautiful young girl here then, from England,—Heloise Fordham,—and she liked Mr. Lyle, and he liked her, and she cried so when he was killed, and had a dreadful headache; and when she went away, she made Miss Armstrong promise to keep up the grave till she came back to see it, and to water the rosebush which she set out, and keep the vase full of flowers in the summer time. And Miss Armstrong did water the rose,—and for a while she tended the grave, hoping to hear from the girl, or that she would come; but she never did, and so at last she grew tired like and careless, and, when she told me about it that day, it was a sight to see for weeds. I like to dig and work in the dirt, and so I made it nice, thinking Godfrey would be pleased; and then, too, do you know, I do it part for the girl, Heloise, who lived in the very house where I live now, and slept in my room. And the poor man was carried there, and his coffin and funeral were in the great room; but I never told auntie, because she is afraid of ghosts. I am not, though, and I like to think about him and her, and to make believe she is there with me, crying by the window for the lover dead down stairs; and once,—it’s funny, but it was the night you came,—I lay awake ever so long, and fancied she was there, and, before I knew it, said right out aloud, ‘Poor Heloise, Gertie is sorry for you.’”

“Oh, child, child, hush, hush!” Edith cried, as she drew Gertie to her and pressed her close to her side.

“Why, is it wicked? Was it naughty to make believe she was there and talk to her?” Gertie asked, wonderingly; and Edith replied:

“No, no, not that; talk to her, pity her, pray for her all you 215please; and tell me, has nothing been heard of her since she went away?”

“Nothing, I guess; and Miss Armstrong said maybe she’s dead or married. I do not like to think her dead. I’d rather believe her married and alive. Don’t you suppose she is?”

“Yes, I believe she is married; and I know she would be so grateful to you and love you so much if she knew what care you take of the grave.” And obeying an impulse she could not resist, Edith smoothed the bright hair back from the fair white forehead, and looking straight into the clear, blue eyes, kissed the child, whose lips kissed back again and sent a strange tremor through every nerve of Edith’s body.

“Had you heard of this grave before?” Gertie asked, puzzled a little at the lady’s manner; and Edith replied:

“Yes; Godfrey told me of it in England, and Colonel Schuyler too, and on our bridal tour we went to see Mr. Lyle’s mother;” and in a low voice Edith told the listening child of the white-haired old woman knitting in the sunshine by the door of that thatched cottage among the heather hills. “I promised to write to her,” she added, “and tell her about the grave, and perhaps you will press me some flowers which grew here and I’ll send them in the letter?”

“Oh, I’d like to do that,” Gertie said; and in a moment her nimble fingers had gathered the few flowers still in blossom, and which were destined for that home beyond the sea where Abelard once lived.

“I pity that old lady so much, and like her too; she seems so much like my grandma, though I don’t know where she is. Auntie never told me.”

“You have one, then?” Edith asked, and Gertie told her all she knew of herself, not forgetting the forty pounds a year which was to pay for her education, for she meant to be a teacher like Miss Armstrong, and play the organ, maybe, when Miss Armstrong was too old.

How interested Edith was in this little girl who puzzled, and confused, and bewildered her so; they were getting acquainted with each other rapidly, when a man’s step sounded in the distance, 216and turning quickly, while a look of eager joy lighted up her face, Gertie cried:

“It is Mr. Godfrey, I guess.”

But Mr. Godfrey was still doing duty at Alice’s side, and the newcomer was Robert Macpherson, who was coming directly toward the cemetery, which he reached before he discovered its occupants. Then, with a start and a blush, as if detected in something he would hide, he lifted his hat to Mrs. Schuyler and went forward to greet her.

“And here is Gertie too,” he said, as he offered her his hand; then turning again to Edith he explained that he had just come from New York in the train which passed a few moments ago.

“Came from New York to-day! Why, Mr. Macpherson, it’s Sunday!” Gertie exclaimed, while Edith smiled, and Mr. Macpherson looked amused as he replied to the child, who believed in the fourth commandment.

“Yes, Gertie, I know it is Sunday, and that I should have waited until to-morrow, inasmuch as there was nothing more pressing than homesickness, for to tell the truth I was homesick in the city, and after church this morning,—there came over me such a longing for the country and a familiar face that I resolved to take the first train to Hampstead. That is why I am here on Sunday, little Puritan,” and he smiled good-humoredly at Gertie, thinking what a wonderful face she had, and how like she was to the sister sleeping under the English skies, and then he glanced at the well-kept grave and at the monument and the name upon it, “James A. Lyle,” and said aloud, in an absent kind of way:

“Born in Alnwick.”

“He saved Godfrey’s life, you know, and lost his own,” Gertie said, while Mr. Macpherson bowed and answered:

“Yes, I know,” but gave no sign that when on reaching the brow of the hill on his way from the station he saw the white headstone gleaming in the distance, he came that way to see for himself this very grave of Abelard Lyle, who was born in Alnwick.

“Shall we go to the house? Godfrey will be glad to know 217you are here,” Edith said, and as she spoke something in the expression of her face made Robert glance quickly from her to Gertie, who was tying on her bonnet.

“They certainly are alike,” he thought. “They would do splendidly in a picture as ‘Les Sœurs,’” and then, as Edith was ready, he walked by her side with Gertie in attendance, until they reached the place where their paths diverged, and Gertie said “good-by,” while Edith and Robert went leisurely toward the house.

CHAPTER XXX.
COMPANY AT SCHUYLER HILL.

n the course of two or three weeks nearly everybody of any social standing in Hampstead called upon the bride. Mrs. Barton and her daughter Rosamond from the Ridge drove over at a very early day, much to the discomfiture of Miss Rossiter, who had told her nieces in confidence that “Mrs. Barton had no intention of calling upon a governess,” that “Mrs. Schuyler need not expect much attention from the beau monde.” Great, then, was her surprise when she went down to meet them; and greeted them a little coldly even while affecting to appropriate their call to herself. But neither Mrs. Barton nor Rosamond seemed to notice her perturbation, and both were delighted with Mrs. Schuyler, who looked and appeared as if all her life had been passed amid just such surroundings as these at Schuyler Hill.

Miss Rossiter saw this, and thought best to change her tactics altogether; and when, as she accompanied her friend to the door, the latter said to her, “I find your sister-in-law very charming,” she replied:

“Yes, I am glad you like her; and it was so kind in you to call. I appreciate it, I assure you.”

And this was the ground she constantly took. Whoever 218called came expressly for her sake and the sake of the family, rather than from any desire to be polite to the bride.

“The Schuylers are so highly respected, and sister Emily was such a favorite with everybody that you must expect attention, of course,” she would say to Edith, who smiled quietly, and understood what was meant quite as well as if it had been put in plainer words.

Miss Rossiter did not like her, but had she been asked a reason for her dislike she could not have given one or brought a single accusation against Edith, except that she was not to the purple born, and was there in Emily’s place. That was all, and that was enough. She had declared war against her, and she meant to carry it out.

But Edith understood her, and parried all her little mean thrusts, and, when questioned before the young ladies of her life in England and the people she knew, answered that she knew nobody except the families where she had taught, and spoke unhesitatingly of her mother, who took lodgers to eke out her slender income; and, when Miss Rossiter suggested to her that it might be as well not to speak of her mother’s lodgers, and offered her advice on certain points of etiquette, telling her it was better not to laugh quite so much, and that such and such dresses were not just the thing for certain occasions, Edith answered good-humoredly, and thanked Miss Rossiter for her advice; but laughed just the same, and shocked the spinster every day at dinner with the sight of her fair, creamy arms and neck, and devoutly wished the lady would return to New York, and leave her in peace. But Miss Rossiter was in no haste to do this; she was averse to exertion of any kind, and found her brother in law’s home so much to her taste and the bride so much better than she had feared, that she had decided to remain in Hampstead until after the grand party, which was to be given at Schuyler Hill, and for which great preparations were making, both in the kitchen, where Mrs. Tiffe was in the full tide of cake and cream and jelly, and in the town, where everybody with any claim to society expected an invitation.

219Mine came to the school-room, and I read it after school, with Gertie standing at my side and looking over my shoulder.

“Oh, that’s the party I’ve heard about! They are to have a band and lights in the trees, and colored waiters in white gloves, and everything. Oh, I wish I could go! Do you think they will invite children like me?” Gertie said, excitedly.

It did not occur to her that there could be any reason why she should not be invited except that she was a child, and I did not enlighten her, but said she was probably too young.

The next morning her face was very bright as she told me what she had heard from Norah, who was down to see her mother. Mrs. Rogers was to assist in the evening, and Gertie was to go, too, and perhaps see the dancing from some post of observation, while Norah had promised to ask Mrs. Schuyler if she might come in and see her after she was dressed, and before she went down stairs.

“And then,” Gertie added, “next week they are to have the Church Sociable, and everybody goes to that, you know, and auntie is to do up my muslin dress, and I shall dance, maybe with Mr. Godfrey. Oh, I wish it was now!”

She was quite as wild over the Church Sociable as the Hampstead ladies were over the party, which came off the 10th of October, and was a grand affair. The night was soft and warm as June, and though there was no moon the lanterns in the trees and on the pedestals lighted up the grounds sufficiently to show their beauty, and make it pleasant to walk about in them. The house itself was ablaze with light, and brilliant with rare and costly flowers, while the band played several sweet airs before the guests began to arrive. In her room upstairs Edith stood dressed in her bridal robes, and looking more beautiful than she had upon her wedding day, for her cheeks were rounder now, with a soft, delicate pink showing through the dazzling white, while her eyes had in them a new brightness, and shone like the diamonds Norah was clasping on her neck and arms.

“Oh, how lovely you are,” Norah said, when the last touch was given to her mistress’s toilet, and she stood back to admire 220her. Then after a moment’s hesitancy, she added: “There is a little girl down stairs dying to see you, ma’am, in your party dress, Gertie Westbrooke. My cousin is here assisting, you know, and brought the child. Would you mind her coming up the back way just to look at you?”

“Certainly not,” Edith replied; and in a few moments Gertie came in, her face glowing and sparkling with delight as she saw the beautiful woman standing before the long mirror, decked in satin and lace and diamonds, her golden brown hair curled as she used to wear it in her girlhood, and falling over a comb behind.

“Oh, my lady! oh, Mrs. Schuyler, you ought to be the queen, only you are a thousand times handsomer than she!” Gertie cried, clasping her hands together, while tears started to her eyes and dropped from her eyelashes.

“Why, child, what is the matter? What makes you cry?” Edith asked, and Gertie replied:

“I don’t know, I always cry when I see a beautiful picture or hear the grand music and the band playing outside, and the house and grounds lighted up, and you so glorious. I can’t help it. Oh, if I only were rich, and could go with the people below!”

“Poor child,” Edith said softly, as she laid her hand on the wavy hair of the little girl. “You might not be as happy as you are now, and then if you were rich you are too young to attend a party of this kind.”

“Yes, I know,” Gertie answered; “but I like fine dresses, and things, and people, and I do wish I might some day be dressed just like you, and stand where you do with my train so long behind me, and I waiting for somebody.”

“Gertie,” the lady said, after a moment’s reflection, “the guests are to remove their wraps in the large room opposite, and by sitting in that chair and turning the gas down you can see them as they pass. Would you like it?”

“Yes, so much,” was the eager reply, and just then the colonel came for his bride to lead her to the drawing-room.

He saw Gertie, but thought she was there to render some 221service to his wife and paid no attention to her. The moment he was gone Gertie turned down the gas, and ensconcing herself in the large easy-chair waited the coming of the guests. And while she waited Godfrey looked in, and seeing the little figure in the chair, walked up to it and said:

“Who’s there? Gertie, as I live! What are you doing?”

“Mrs. Schuyler said I might sit here and see the ladies pass in their gay dresses, so I’m making believe I’m one of them, and at the party, too. Oh if it was only real, and I could dance the Lancers!”

“Gertie, I say, how are you dressed?” Godfrey asked, turning up the gas and inspecting the child. “No, that won’t do,—not the ‘wedding garments,’ you know. Gertie, I tell you what, we are to have the church sociable next week, and that is a heap nicer than a party. Come, then, and I’ll dance your shoes off with you. There’s a ring,—I must go. When you get tired of making believe here, go round to the north staircase, and you can look down into the hall and dining-room. Good-by.”

He was gone just as the first arrivals came up the stairs and into the room opposite where Gertie sat. And Gertie watched them eagerly and heard all they said, and mentally commented upon their attire, and compared them with Edith; and then, when they were all gone, crept cautiously round to the north staircase where Godfrey had said she could see the dancing.

The party was a great success, with no drawback whatever, except the fact that Tom Barton from the Ridge drank too much champagne and became noisy and uproarious, and when by chance he stumbled upon Gertie, who was making her way to the kitchen through a side passage, he told her: “Ze was ze pressiest girl there, by gorrie,” and emphasized his compliment with a kiss. For this audacity Godfrey, who happened to be in sight, seized him by the collar and thrust him headlong out of doors, bidding him stay there till he could behave.

Edith was pronounced perfectly charming by every one, and no young girl received as much flattery and attention as the beautiful mistress of the festivities, who bore herself like a princess, 222and received the commendations of those about her with a sweet graciousness of manner which won every heart. She was not fond of dancing and only went on the floor twice, once with Godfrey and once with Robert Macpherson, who was quite a lion with the girls, especially as he was new and a foreigner.

“The Macphersons are very rich, and there’s a title in the family; he only paints and sketches because he likes it; he is not obliged to do it,” Julia explained to Rosamond Barton, who was questioning his antecedents and pronouncing him “splendid and distingué, with a face like a poet.”

It was very late when the party broke up, and it was later still when Mrs. Rogers’ duties were over and she led the tired, sleepy Gertie by the hand through the morning moonlight to the cottage by the bridge. Gertie had seen a great deal of the party, and had envied the young ladies whom Godfrey whirled in the dance, and wished herself one of them. But there had been a comfort in knowing that her turn would come next week at the sociable, to which everybody was invited on the following Sunday, when the Rev. Mr. Marks, the new Rector at St. Luke’s, gave notice that the first church sociable of the season would be at Schuyler Hill on Thursday evening, adding that as the proceeds were to be appropriated for a new melodeon, which was greatly needed at the Mission School, a full attendance was desired.

CHAPTER XXXI.
THE CHURCH SOCIABLE.

he young ladies had enjoyed the party thoroughly, but the church sociable was another thing, and the blame of it was charged entirely to Edith, who was really not in fault.

Mr. Marks, the rector, was very zealous in his work, and one morning, while calling upon Edith, he broached the subject of the sociable. They were needing so much money, he said, 223and there was no house in the parish which would accommodate so many people or attract so great a crowd as the house at Schuyler Hill, and he wished Mrs. Schuyler would consent to have the sociable for once.

Edith knew nothing at all of church sociables, or in what disfavor they were held in the house, and answered: “Certainly; I am quite willing if my husband is. You can ask him.” Julia, who was just entering the room, overheard the proposition, and went at once with the news to her aunt and Alice.

“The idea of a Mite Society here,” she said, “with everybody coming, and Mrs. Vandeusenhisen the first to ring the bell, and Mrs. Thockmorton’s hired girl the second. It is preposterous. But father will never allow it, I am sure. Mr. Marks is to ask him, you know?”

“Don’t flatter yourself, my dear, or count upon what your father may or may not do,” Miss Rossiter said, with all the scorn her thin lips could express. “New wives make new laws, and your father is a mere tool in that woman’s hands. Once he had a will of his own, now he has none, save that of her, whose low-born tastes will lead her to consort with such people as a Mite Society will bring.”

Miss Rossiter was very bitter, and something of her poison was communicated to her niece, who was very distant toward Edith at lunch, and on the plea of headache declined to drive with her as she had intended doing. So Emma went instead, leaving her sister and aunt to talk Edith up and wonder if Colonel Schuyler would consent. Julia was sure he would not, and yet she felt glad when she saw him riding up the avenue, inasmuch as she would have an opportunity of speaking to him first. But the rector had seen the colonel in town, and told him of his call upon Edith, and her willingness to have the society, provided her husband did not object.

“Yes, certainly,—a society,—a sociable,—I—I—I am not quite certain I understand just what that is. I do not think I ever went to one,” the colonel said, spitting two or three times and looking a little disturbed.

Mr. Marks explained as well as he could, and expatiated 224largely upon the good which resulted from these promiscuous assemblies, where all met upon a level, as Christian people should.

“It gives the poor and neglected a chance to get acquainted,” he said, “and thus promotes good feelings and religious growth generally.”

“Yes, certainly,” the colonel said, abstractedly, as he beat the tip of his boot with his riding-whip. “I don’t think there’s ever been a thing like it at Schuyler Hill, but have it by all means, if Mrs. Schuyler signified the least desire for it.”

The colonel’s chestnut mare was pawing the turf, impatient to be off, and bowing stiffly to the rector, Col. Schuyler mounted her and galloped toward home, where he was met by Julia and Miss Rossiter, who plunged at once into the obnoxious society, which they trusted he would veto. Miss Rossiter was the principal speaker, and she said that Mrs. Schuyler could not understand or appreciate her position as his wife, if she wished such a mixture of people to come there, trampling on their velvet carpets and spilling cream on their handsome furniture.

“And, Howard, you may just as well be master of your own house first as last, unless you wish an entire new element introduced into your social relations.”

The colonel himself had been a little disturbed about the society, not knowing exactly whether it were au fait, but something in Miss Rossiter’s manner angered him, as it implied reproach to Edith, and he roused at once in her defence and said he had seen Mr. Marks, who alone was responsible if there was anything wrong in the affair; that he had given his consent and should not withdraw it, but should expect his daughters to do whatever was necessary to make the gathering a success. That settled it, and Miss Rossiter took one of her headaches and retired to her room and did not appear at dinner, where with a stern glance at Julia, whose face was cloudy and dark, the colonel said to his wife:

“Ah, my dear, I met Mr. Marks, who persuaded me into having the Sewing Society, or something of that kind, with 225sponge-cake and cream, at our house next week, provided you do not object.”

“Not at all; I told him I did not,” Edith replied, and the colonel continued:

“Then, my daughter,” turning to Julia, “see that Mrs. Tiffe has everything in readiness.”

Julia bowed, while Godfrey dropped his fork and almost hurrahed in his surprise. He knew what a Church Sociable with sponge-cake and cream meant; he had attended more than one in Hampstead, and danced with every girl there, and every forlorn, neglected woman who wanted a partner, but he had never dreamed of bringing the mixed assemblage across that aristocratic threshold, and lo it was coming without his aid, and he was delighted, and he invited every man, woman and child in town, and came to me with a beaming face and told me the good news, and asked if I would play the piano for them, and said he would get two or three musicians to accompany me and have a “smashing time.”

“It will be enough sight nicer than the party was,” he said to his sisters, when, on Sunday after the notice had been given out, they were discussing it and expressing their contempt for the whole thing. “Folks will enjoy themselves at a sociable; they always do, and they don’t get drunk either, as that puppy Tom Barton did, nor stay all night; they go home at a Christian hour. I know; I’ve been to them and it is great fun, I tell you. I mean to dance with Mrs. Vandeusenhisen, too, if she is here. You ought to see Widow Barringer and Nat. Allen. They take all the steps, and do not mince along as some girls I know of They dance, I tell you.”

“Oh, Godfrey, how can you talk and act so low,” Julia said; but before Godfrey could reply Edith joined the group, which in consequence was soon after broken up.

The Sociable was much talked of in Hampstead, and everybody went, from Rosamond Barton and her brother Tom, down to Mrs. Vandeusenhisen, who entered through the kitchen; leading the twins, Godfrey Schuyler and Schuyler Godfrey. “They were so anxious to come to the doin’s and get some 226cream,” she said, “that she concluded to bring ’em, seein’ it was free and she had as good right there as the next one.”

With the most intense disgust, bristling in her cap ribbons and every fold of her stiff silk dress, Mrs. Tiffe bowed and said:

“You better sit here, until the ladies are ready to receive you. Miss Creighton and Miss Schuyler are not yet dressed.”

Mrs. Vandeusenhisen took this advice very meekly and sat with a boy each side of her, looking curiously around the kitchen, until the door bell rang and she heard the voice of Mr. Marks, the Rector. Then her dignity rose, and the kitchen could content her no longer. Her minister had come, and where he was she had a right to be, and seizing her twins she started for the parlor, where with the fun fairly leaping from his eyes and shining all over his face, Godfrey received her and presented her to Edith. But the splendors of the drawing-room were too much for Mrs. Vandeusenhisen, and after a low courtesy and a whisper to the twins “to make their manners to the lady,” the poor woman sank abashed into a corner, where she found a silken couch on which she ensconced herself with her twins, and bidding them keep still if they did not want to be skinned alive, she prepared to enjoy herself by watching the arrivals.

The bell rang constantly now, and with each ring Julia, who was still in her room, stole to the bannister and looking over to see who had come, ran back to report to Alice and Miss Rossiter. This last lady had a headache, and her nerves would not allow her to mingle in the promiscuous crowd assembling below, the Goths and Vandals who had never set foot in that house before.

“What would Emily say?” she groaned, as Julia reported one after another, the Widow Barringer, and Nat. Allen, and Mrs. Peter Clafflin with Mrs. Vandeusenhisen and the twins.

Poor Miss Rossiter leaned back despairingly on her pillows, and wondered “who would come next.” It was Tom and Rosamond Barton, and the latter came straight to Miss Rossiter’s room, and said “it was such fun, and she meant to coax 227mamma to have it, and she wished Miss Rossiter could go down and enjoy it!”

Julia, Alice and Rosamond descended the stairs together and were met at the foot by Godfrey, who said:

“Now, girls, cheek by jowl with Tom, Dick, and Harry, and Peterkin Vandeusenhisen. Look, Alice! there he is casting sheep’s eyes at you, and gotten up stunningly, too.”

And truly Peterkin was stunning in his yellow vest and flame-colored cravat, which was tied in a most wonderful bow, and he stood blushing and smiling and watching Alice Creighton, and wondering if she would let him dance with her. The house was full by this time, and a more promiscuous crowd was rarely ever seen in a gentleman’s parlors, or a better behaved, considering everything.

“Really, my dear, it is very remarkable how well they conduct themselves,” the colonel said to Edith, as he stood at her side and looked at the people who neither laughed nor talked noisily, nor jostled each other, but spoke together in low, subdued tones as they moved about and quietly inspected the handsome rooms and furniture.

Dancing commenced at eight in the large breakfast-room, which had been cleared for the occasion. Tom Barton, who when himself was very gentlemanly and agreeable, was the first upon the floor with Emma as his partner, while Robert Macpherson followed next with Julia, and Godfrey with Rosamond.

“Come, boys, fill up, fill up,” Godfrey cried, to the row of bashful youths, looking longingly at the row of expectant girls. “We want some one to fill our set. Here, Peterkin, get your girl and join us.”

“I dassent for fear she won’t,” Peter said, blushing to the roots of his hair.

Godfrey knew who she was, and answered the timid swain:

“Nonsense! You are too faint-hearted. Yes, she will; try her, and hurry up!”

Thus encouraged, Peter made his way to Alice, and making the bow he had practised at intervals for a week in anticipation of this very event, said, with a face as red as his necktie:

228“Miss Creighton, will you please to be—so good—as to—dance this time with me? Mr. Godfrey said how you would.”

With a look of ineffable scorn, Alice replied:

“Thank you, sir. I do not dance to-night.”

Her eyes and voice expressed her contempt, and Peter felt it, and utterly crestfallen and abashed, went back to Godfrey and said:

“I tole you she wouldn’t, and she won’t.”

“Oh, bother; but never mind, there’s,—but no.”

And Godfrey stopped short in what he was going to say.

Gertie had paid her respects to Edith, and then, attracted by the music, made her way to the breakfast-room and stood within the door.

Godfrey’s first thought when he saw her was to give her to Peterkin for a partner, but some undefined feeling forced the impulse back. He could see proud Alice Creighton dance with Peter and think it rare fun, but not this beautiful child, who might thus be classed with the lout. Her partners must be the best in the room, Robert Macpherson, and himself, and young Ransom, the judge’s son, who fortunately came that way just then looking for a lady.

“Here, Will. We want you here. Let me introduce you to the prettiest girl in the room,” Godfrey said; and the next moment Gertie stood upon the floor opposite Robert and Julia Schuyler.

How pretty and graceful she was, and how well she went through with the dance, never making the slightest mistake, but seeming to carry her tall partner along by the airy ease of her motions.

“I say, Schuyler, who is that princess in disguise I have just danced with?” young Ransom said to Godfrey, after he had led Gertie to a seat.

“She is a princess in disguise, I do believe. Isn’t she pretty though?” Godfrey replied; and then he told what he knew of Gertie Westbrooke, and added, laughingly: “But hands off, if you please. She is only thirteen, and I will not have her harmed.”

229“Better talk to Tom Barton, then. See, he is asking her to dance,” was Will Ransom’s reply, and glancing where Gertie sat, Godfrey saw Tom bending before the child, who, remembering the insult on the night of the party, coolly declined the honor intended her without offering an excuse. But Tom understood her, and after standing an awkward moment and regarding her intently, he said:

“Miss Gertie, you are right to refuse me unless I apologize for my rudeness the other night. I was drunk, to speak plain, and did not know what I was doing. I beg your pardon, and by and by if I ask you to dance I hope you will not refuse.”

Tom could be very agreeable and polite, and in spite of his fault he was a favorite with many, and when he spoke so frankly to Gertie she felt that she forgave him, and promised to join him in the next dance if he liked. Gertie did not lack for partners that night, and what was best of all, they were from the “crême de la crême” of the town. Will Ransom twice, Robert Macpherson twice, Tom Barton once, and at last Godfrey himself, who had only danced the first set in order to get the thing going, he said. It was the Lancers, Gertie’s favorite, and Godfrey led her to a conspicuous place, and all through the dance felt a thrill of pride in the graceful creature, who seemed to float rather than walk through the different changes.

A little apart Edith stood, watching the child, wondering at her skill. With a sign to Godfrey she made him understand that he was to bring Gertie to her when the dance was ended.

“Who taught you to dance?” she asked, as she looked down upon the sparkling face.

“I had a teacher in London two quarters,” was Gertie’s reply, and then as her hand was claimed again she glided away, leaving Edith to watch and wonder and try to recall, if possible, the face or the expression of which Gertie reminded her.

It was very gay at Schuyler Hill that night, for as the evening advanced the stiffness which had at first characterized the strangers wore away, and those who did not dance joined in the games which were played in an adjoining room, and Miss Rossiter, in her lone chamber, corked her ears with cotton to shut 230out the noise, which was far more harsh and discordant because it came from what she termed the “canaille.” Financially, too, the Sociable was a great success, for after the colonel had added his donation in the shape of a “twenty,” it was found that they had raised seventy dollars, and that the melodeon was sure. Had it not been, the colonel would have paid the balance rather than open his doors again, for the affair was not to his taste, and he was glad when the last guest had said good-night and his house was cleared of them all. He did not like church sociables, and his daughters did not like them, and Mrs. Tiffe did not like them, though there was one comfort, that worthy matron said—“They ate up all the dry cake left from the party,” and she congratulated herself upon having two fresh loaves of sponge left as she locked up her store-room and silver, and retired for the night.

Gertie was too much excited to sleep, and long after her return home she sat and talked of the Sociable and what she had seen, and when at last she laid her head upon her pillow it was with the conviction that she never could be as happy again as she had been that night at Schuyler Hill, dancing the Lancers with Godfrey.

CHAPTER XXXII.
MRS. ROGERS SPEAKS HER MIND.

allo, Bob, are you going anywhere in particular?” was Godfrey’s salutation to Robert Macpherson, when the next afternoon he met him at a point in the grounds where two paths diverged.

“Just to town for a walk. Are you going anywhere in particular?” was the reply, to which Godfrey responded:

“Just away from town for a walk.”

And so the two took different roads and sauntered on until, curiously enough, they met again at the gate of Mrs. Rogers’s cottage, where Gertie sat alone upon the porch.

231“Did you start to come here?” Robert asked, coloring a little, and Godfrey replied:

“Yes; did you?” while his face wore a look of annoyance, which was in no wise lessened when ten minutes later Tom Barton also appeared, and seemed to think it a good joke that they had all met there together and so found each other out.

“I don’t know what there is to find out,” Godfrey said doggedly, adding, as he rose to his feet with an impatient shake of his pants: “This is most too much of a good thing, and I think I’ll go.”

“Please, Mr. Godfrey, don’t,” Gertie said beseechingly, feeling intuitively that hers was rather a novel position, alone with three young men, and that Godfrey was in some way a protection.

He came to see her of course, but she was too much a child to think for a moment that the remembrance of her blue eyes and wavy hair had brought the others there. They came, no doubt, to get some sewing done, and she was sorry her auntie was gone, and very glad when at last she saw her coming round the turn in the road, for now they could give their orders and go away.

For an instant Mary Rogers stopped short at sight of three town-bred, fashionable young men, with perfumed locks, and fancy canes, and short coats, and soft hats, sitting before her door, with Gertie in their midst, looking so beautiful and pure and innocent, and so unconscious withal of the admiration she was exciting. Then, the good honest-minded woman’s resolution was taken, and she went swiftly up the walk and courtesying to her visitors asked what she could do for them.

“Nothing, nothing, madame, we simply came to call,” Tom Barton replied, inspecting her curiously, as if she had been a Hottentot, and wondering how that dainty bit of flesh and blood in the blue dress and pantalets chanced to belong to her.

“Come to call, did you. I am sorry then I happened to be out. Gertie, I brought this letter from the office for Mrs. Simmons. Tie on your bonnet and take it to her directly,” Mary Rogers said, while a dead silence fell upon the group of young men, each of whom looked at the others inquiringly.

232Gertie was only sorry to leave Godfrey, but reflecting that if she hurried he might be there when she came back, she hastened away, while her admirers looked after her until the turn in the road hid her from view. Then Mrs. Rogers spoke, standing up before them with a flush on her face and a dignity in her tone and manner which commanded respect from her audience.

“Young men,” she began, “you came to see Gertie, and I don’t like it, and won’t allow it either. She is too young to have such ideas put in her head, even were you honest, which you are not. Not one of you would marry her, or be willing to be seen with her by your fashionable city friends, if she were older than she is. You do not look upon her as your equal, and you only come to amuse yourselves with her because she is pretty and sweet; but it shall not be. It’s no credit to a girl in Gertie’s position to have a lot of chaps like you hanging round her and putting stuff into her head, and I won’t have a breath of harm done to her future good name by your coming here and talking nonsense, which you don’t mean, and I put it to your honor to do by my child as you would have a body do by your sister if she was as young and innocent as Gertie.”

“By George, you are right! and I give you my hand as a gentleman that by no act of mine shall Gertie be compromised!” Tom Barton exclaimed, as he rose to his feet and offered his hand to Gertie’s champion.

Tom’s example was followed by Robert Macpherson, but Godfrey sat still in his chair. Mrs. Rogers did not mean him, of course. She knew he never would harm any woman, and he was not going to promise not to see Gertie Westbrooke, and talk to her, too, as much as he liked. But it was a good thing to snub that drunken Tom Barton, who was half-intoxicated now, and he felt like cheering Mrs. Rogers, and meant to stay after the others were gone, and tell her so. But Robert Macpherson meant to stay, too, and, after waiting impatiently ten or fifteen minutes, Godfrey arose at last and said good-afternoon, wondering within himself why “Bob would stick himself where he was not wanted.”

Robert had business with Mrs. Rogers, and, when alone with 233her, he began at once by assuring her that so far as he was concerned she had nothing to fear for Gertie.

“And you will know you have not,” he continued, “when I tell you that she is the very image of the only sister I ever had,—the little girl who died when just Gertie’s age, and of whom I never think without a throb of pain.”

It was this wonderful likeness, he said, which first attracted him to Gertie, and made him so desirous for her portrait, as he had none of his sister. And then he went on to tell how fond he was of his profession as an artist, and that as there were so many fine views in the vicinity of Hampstead, he wished to remain there for a time, sketching and studying the autumnal scenery, and, as he would not of course stay at Schuyler Hill, he wished to rent a room in some quiet house, and take his meals at the hotel.

Had Mrs. Rogers such a room, and would she let it to him for a liberal compensation? Mrs. Rogers was in need of money. Her own health was not good, and Gertie’s education and music would cost so much that Robert’s offer was a tempting one, and she considered it for a few moments, and then said yes, and showed him the large, pleasant room where Abelard Lyle’s coffin had stood, and where, within a few days, easels, and pallets, and brushes, and paint were scattered about promiscuously; for Robert had taken possession, and dubbed the room his “Den,” and was going to paint “La Sœur” from Gertie’s face, and then retouch from his memory of his sister.

Mary Rogers had struck a powerful blow for Gertie, and hedged her round with the respect of the young men, who otherwise might have turned her head as she grew to womanhood, with all her wondrous beauty and fascinating sweetness, but for a time she felt some misgivings as to the propriety of having taken Robert Macpherson as a lodger. But when she saw how quiet and unobtrusive he was, never seeking either herself or her child, unless he needed them for the sittings, her watchfulness gradually subsided, and she felt that her home was pleasanter for having the artist there.

234Tom Barton came sometimes to see him, but he never asked for Gertie, and if by chance he saw her going out or coming in, he treated her with as much deference as if she had been one of the ladies from Schuyler Hill. For a few weeks Godfrey was there every day, and sometimes twice a day, but as she knew him better Mary had no fears of him, and trusted her darling to him as if he had been a brother.

And Gertie did him good, and always reproved him in her outspoken way, when she found him relapsing into careless habits of speaking, and kept him constantly upon his good behavior when he was with her. But she did not think him a gentleman, and she frankly told him so when in November he came to say good-by, before going to Andover, where he hoped to prepare himself for Yale the following year. In a laughing way he referred to her promise made on the ship, and she replied:

“I heard you say by George, and call your father the Governor, and you are not a gentleman yet;” but her lip quivered a little, and it was long ere Godfrey forgot the expression of the blue eyes, which looked at him so wistfully as Gertie said good-by, and told him so innocently how much she should miss him.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE NEW LIFE AT THE HILL.

t was just one year from the day when Edith came to Hampstead, and over the house upon the Hill a dark cloud was hanging, as hour after hour went by, and there seemed to be no hope for the pale-faced woman lying at the very gates of death, and talking in her delirium of things which no one understood. She had been thus ever since the birth of the infant boy, at which the colonel scarcely looked, so intense was his anxiety for the young mother, who, whenever he came near her with words of tenderness, motioned him away, saying:

235“No, no, you mustn’t, you don’t know. It is not the first, as you think. Oh, my baby, I don’t know where she is; find her, Howard; find my baby for me.”

He brought her the little mite of flesh and blood wrapped in soft cambric and flannel, and said:

“Look, Edith, here is our boy; shall I lay it beside you?” Very wistfully the gray eyes glanced for a moment into the colonel’s face and then down upon the child, while a look of anguish crept into them as Edith cried:

“No, no, this is not the one. I want my lost baby, with the blue eyes. Will no one find it for me?”

Then in a curious way she would examine her surroundings and whisper to herself:

“Handsome furniture, fine linen, silken curtains, and silver dishes to eat from. This is not the place. Mother, mother, where am I, and are you there by the fire with baby?”

She was back again in London in the forlorn room in Dorset street, and the rain was splashing against the windows just as it did that dreary day, and she heard the footsteps of the lodgers on the stairs and the roar of the great city, and fought again the battle for her child, and the iron hand came back and clutched her throat and strangled her until her face was purple and she writhed in the agonies of suffocation. Then, when the paroxysm was over she lay for hours in a swoon so nearly resembling death, that at last they thought her gone and the whisper that she was dead ran through the hall, down to the servants’ quarters, where it was told to Gertie Westbrooke, who had come to inquire for her.

“No, no, not dead; oh, what shall I do?” Gertie cried, as with a low moan she sank down upon the grass by the door, and covering her face with her hands wept passionately.

During the past year Edith and Gertie had met often by the grave which the child tended with so much care, and they had learned to know each other well. Together they had talked of French and music and the books which Gertie liked best and the flowers of which Gertie knew so much; and Edith had written to the white-haired old lady among the heather hills, and 236sent the roses Gertie had pressed. And when the answer came which had in it a blessing for “the bonny lassie who looks after my puir laddie’s grave,” Edith read it to Gertie as they sat under the shadow of the whispering pine which grew above the grave. And now all this had come to an end, and all the brightness of Gertie’s life seemed stricken out with the words:

“Mrs. Schuyler is dead.”

“And she so lovely and good,—and she liked me, too. Oh, I cannot bear it,—I cannot!” Gertie sobbed, just as a footstep came near.

Looking up, she saw Emma, who, overhearing the words, and guessing at their meaning, said to her:

“Gertie, she is not dead. She has revived a little and is breathing still, though the doctor thinks her dying.”

“Not dead? Then there is hope! Oh, Miss Emma, may I just look at her? I’ll be so very quiet, and I loved her so much!”

“Yes. I do not know as you can do any harm by looking at her,” Emma said, and in an instant Gertie was flying up the stairs and along the south hall which led to Edith’s room.

The door was open, and looking in, she saw the white face upon the pillow, framed in masses of golden-brown hair, which the fair hands had torn and matted when the iron fingers were at the throat. She seemed to be dead, and the doctor touched her pulse to see if it still beat, when the lips said faintly:

“Where’s my little girl?”

The last word was prolonged, and to the excited child it sounded like “little Gertie,” and, without stopping to consider the consequences, Gertie darted across the floor to the side of the sick woman, whose lips she kissed, as she said:

“I’m here! I’m here!”

“Go away!” came sternly from the wretched husband, who frowned darkly upon the girl thus audaciously disturbing his dying wife.

And with a frightened face Gertie started to obey him, when the physician interposed and stopped her, saying:

“Speak to her again.”

237His practised eye had detected a change in his patient when Gertie first spoke to her, and now, when at his command the silvery voice, so full of love and tender pathos, said, “I am here,—little Gertie. Do you know me, Mrs. Schuyler?” there certainly was a change, but whether from the effect of the powerful medicine given a few moments before as a last experiment, or because of that voice, which rang so clear and birdlike, I cannot tell. I only know something penetrated into the deep darkness, and brought back the senses almost gone forever. There was a fluttering of the eyelids; then they unclosed, and the eyes looked full at Gertie, while the lips whispered, “Stay!” and a hand moved slowly toward the child, who grasped it in her own, and held it fast, while Edith slept for a few moments.

“She is better,—she will live,” the doctor said, as he met her look of recognition when her sleep was over. “Quiet now is what she needs.”

And then Gertie started to leave the room, but the white fingers closed tightly round hers, and seeing that, Colonel Schuyler bade her stay.

So Gertie stayed that afternoon, and sat by Edith’s side, and smoothed the tangled hair and bathed the pale forehead, and held the cooling drink to the parched lips; and once when the baby cried in the next room she went and took it up, and, soothing it into quiet, laid it back upon its dainty bed.

Gertie was a natural nurse, and she covered herself with so much glory that day at Schuyler Hill that the colonel himself unbent to her, and sent her home in his carriage because of a rain which was falling, and asked her to come again.

And Gertie went often during the weeks of Edith’s illness, and the sick woman felt better and happier when Gertie was in the room beside her, where she could look at her and touch her if she chose. There had been consciousness for half an hour or more after the birth of her child, but instead of joy that “a man was born into the world,” there had swept over her a wave of bitter anguish as she remembered the home in Dorset Street, and the other little one, of whom Colonel Schuyler never heard, and whose father slept under the evergreen which she could see 238from her window nodding in the autumn wind, and bending toward her as it seemed in an attitude of menace.

They had brought her baby for her to see, but the touch of its hand on her cheek had awakened such intense love, and remorse, and pity and longing for the other child dead so long ago, that she had writhed in agony and pushed her boy away, while her wandering mind went far, far down into the deepest depths of darkness as she reviewed a page of her life which she had thought sealed forever. How awful were the hours of those days when the pine tree nodded and grinned and laughed and threw its long arms at her, and Abelard came and stood beside her with sad, reproachful eyes.

Oh, it was horrible, and from this horror Gertie’s voice had called her back, and she clung to the young girl, and insisted upon having her with her as much as possible, and said to herself:

“It’s because of her care for that grave that I love her so much;” and when one day during her convalescence Gertie came to her and told her of Miss Armstrong’s sudden illness, and that the school was closed indefinitely, and asked what she should do for a teacher, Edith considered for a moment, and then said:

“Go, please, to Colonel Schuyler’s room, and ask him to come here, and you wait in the hall till you see him go out.”

“What is it, darling? Can I do anything for you?” the colonel asked, as he bent over his wife.

“Yes, Howard,” and Edith’s white fingers strayed caressingly over his hair and forehead. “You know that,—that both of us feel as if I were indebted to Gertie Westbrooke for my life, and I wish to do her a favor. Will you say yes to it?”

“Certainly—certainly. Is it money?” the colonel asked, and Edith replied:

“No. Miss Armstrong’s school is broken up, and Gertie has no teacher. She is a fine scholar, I hear, and anxious to learn. Let her come here every day and recite to Miss Browning. Miss Alice has nearly finished her education, and will soon be gone. Shall it be so? May I tell her to come?”

239There was a momentary hesitation on the colonel’s part and then he answered:

“Yes, certainly, yes, let her come. You always had a penchant for this girl, and I must say she seems a very remarkable child.”

And so it was settled that Gertie was henceforth to recite to Miss Browning, and though there was much opposition in the school-room, the colonel stood firmly to his decision, and one pleasant morning in October Gertie brought her books to Schuyler Hill and took the desk assigned her, far removed from her aristocratic companions, who at first scarcely noticed her by so much as a nod of recognition.

But as time went on her sweet temper and quiet, gentle demeanor insensibly won upon them, while they were surprised at her scholarship, so superior in some respects to their own that even Alice stooped more than once to ask information from her. Whatever Gertie undertook she did thoroughly, but her great success as a scholar was owing in part to the interest Robert Macpherson had evinced in her studies ever since he became an occupant of the cottage. He was away now on the Western prairies sketching the scenery there, and so Gertie was thrown upon her own resources; but she was equal to the emergency, and studied early and late to overtake and surpass, if possible, the young ladies who looked upon her so contemptuously. But for any coldness on their part she more than had amends in the extreme kindness with which Edith invariably treated her; while the baby, who was called James for the colonel’s father, was a constant source of delight.

Jamie was a beautiful child, with a mass of dark brown curls, and eyes like his father’s; and even Julia, who had from the first been opposed to his birth, and treated her step-mother with great coolness on account of it, softened toward him, and wrote to Miss Rossiter, who was now in New York, that “he really was a fine child, and that all things considered, she was quite reconciled to his birth, though she felt for Godfrey, who was no longer the only son.”

The baby was a success, and no one seemed to love it more than Gertie Westbrooke. She was passionately fond of children, 240and devoted herself so much to Jamie that he soon learned to know her, and would cry when she left his sight. And so it came about that she was much with Edith, who each day grew more and more interested in her, and more resolved to care for and befriend her in every possible way.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
MARY ROGERS.

t was a cold wintry night, and a February rain was beating against the windows of the house on the Hill, when Edith was roused from sleep by Norah, who said:

“If you please, Mrs. Schuyler, Gertie Westbrooke has come all alone from the cottage in the rain and dark, and says my cousin is dying and wants to see you. She’s very bad, and talking such queer things.”

Scarcely knowing what she was doing, Edith arose and began to dress, while the colonel followed more leisurely, feeling annoyed at Mary Rogers for being sick on such a night as this, and sending for his wife, thereby putting him to great discomfort and inconvenience, for if Edith went to the cottage he of course must go also. And in a short time they were in their carriage and driving rapidly down the road toward the house, where Gertie was anxiously expecting them.

As soon as she delivered her message she ran back through the darkness and rain, and when the carriage drew up before the gate she stood in the open doorway, her hair all wet and dripping, and her face pale with fear as she clutched Edith’s dress, and whispered:

“I’m so glad you have come. She wanted you so much and said there was something she must tell you. But I’m afraid she can’t now, because she’s worse. She cannot talk. The doctor is there. I went for him first, and then back by the Hill. Come quick, please,” and Gertie hurried her on to the apartment 241where Mary Rogers lay, her face ashen pale, and her eyes fastening themselves with a look of intense longing and eagerness upon Edith as she came in. When a young girl Mrs. Rogers had suffered from an affection of the heart, which she supposed she had entirely outlived. Within the last few months, however, it had troubled her at intervals, and on the night of the severe attack she had told Gertie she was not well, and gone early to bed. Gertie, who slept upstairs, was awakened, she said, by loud groans, and hurrying to her auntie’s room she found her on the floor, where she had fallen in her attempt to strike a light. Her first words after Gertie helped her back to bed were:

“I am going to die, and I must see Mrs. Schuyler and tell her something. Go for her quick, and the doctor, too, if you are not afraid.”

She could talk then, but her powers of speech were gone now, and when Edith went up to her and said: “What can I do for you?” her lips tried in vain to frame the words she would say, while great drops of sweat stood upon her face, wrung out by her intense desire to speak. It was hardly paralysis, or apoplexy either, the doctor said, but a kind of cross between the two, and while it left her mind perfectly clear, it took from her the power of utterance, and made her as helpless as a child.

“Can’t you tell me what it is you wish to say to me?” Edith asked, as she took the hand which was raised feebly to meet hers.

There was a shake of the head, and Edith continued: “Perhaps you can write it?”

Another head shake, while the eager eyes went from Edith’s face to Gertie, and from Gertie back again.

“I think I can guess,” Edith said. “It is about Gertie. You wish to talk to me of her.”

Then the quivering lips moved, and gave forth a sound which Edith knew meant “Yes,” and she continued: “You are anxious about her future if you die?”

Mrs. Rogers waited a moment and then nodded assent, while every muscle of her face worked painfully as she tried to speak.

242“Oh, auntie,” Gertie cried, as she bent over the sick woman, “don’t be troubled for me. I can take care of myself. I am strong and well and willing to work. I can find something to do, and everybody will be kind to me.”

There were tears in Mary’s eyes, and they rolled down her cheeks as she looked at the brave young girl, who was so sure of finding kindness in everybody.

Meanwhile Edith had been thinking, and as the result of her thought she said:

“Mrs. Rogers, will it comfort you to know that if you die Gertie shall come to live with me, and that I will take care of her?”

Then the quivering lips managed to say: “Yes,” and feeling for Gertie’s hand Mary put it in Edith’s, and whispered “Yours,” while the sweat drops on her face grew larger and thicker with her agonizing efforts to tell what she could not. How hard she tried to make them understand the secret she had kept so long, and once she took the shawl which lay near her, and folding it up to look like a child, she held it close to her bosom as a mother holds her baby, and then with her hand pointed to Gertie, and from her to Edith, mumbling the one word, “Yours, yours.”

“What does she mean?” Edith asked in great perplexity. “It must be something about little Jamie,—that you will take care of him perhaps. Is that it?”

Mrs. Rogers’ “No-o-o” came with a moaning cry, followed at last by the word “equal,” spoken so plainly that there could be no mistake.

“Equal,” Edith repeated, thoughtfully; and then, as a sudden idea came into her mind, her face flushed a little, and, remembering the pride and haughtiness at Schuyler Hill, and the opposition she might have to encounter, she hesitated a moment before she asked: “You wish Gertie to come to me as an equal?”

There was a decided nod, and then Edith glanced at the beautiful girl beside her standing with clasped hands, her head bent forward to listen, with a look of surprise and wonder in 243her eyes. That she should go to Schuyler Hill as anything but an equal had never occurred to her, and the question hurt her a little, and brought a flush of pride into her face as she waited Edith’s reply.

“Surely, they can make no menial of her,” Edith thought, as she looked again at the young girl just budding into womanhood, and resolving to brave everything she said, as if there had never been a doubt in her mind. “Certainly, Mrs. Rogers, she shall come as an equal, and have every possible advantage. I promise you that solemnly. Are you satisfied?”

Mary nodded, while her eyes still wore that look of intense longing, as if there was something more which she wished to tell. But she could not, though she kept repeating “Yours, yours.”

They could not guess her meaning, and thought her mind was wandering; but the motion of dissent she made when they hinted as much was a proof to the contrary.

Very sleepy, and uncomfortable, and a little impatient withal, Colonel Schuyler waited in the adjoining room, wholly unsuspicious of the compact which was to affect him so seriously. But Edith did not forget him, or that it was his right to have something to say on the matter; and when she saw the sick woman was quiet, she went out to him, and laying her arm caressingly across his neck, said:

“Howard, I have done something which I trust you will approve. That poor woman is distressed about leaving Gertie alone, and I have promised that she shall live with us.”

“Certainly, if you wish it,” the colonel said, thinking of Jamie, and how much he was attached to Gertie Westbrooke.

“Yes, but that is not all. I have promised to take her as an equal; not as a servant in any form. I am to treat her and educate her as if she were my sister. Are you willing, Howard? If not, say so at once, that I may take back my pledge for if she dies with my promise given, I must keep it to the letter. Are you willing, Howard?”

He did not know whether he was or not. He only knew that it was very disagreeable being turned out of bed at midnight 244and brought through the storm to this comfortless room, where the fire in the stove did not burn, and the one candle on the table ran up a huge black wick and smelled horribly of tallow; and then, to crown all, Edith must ask if he was willing to take into his family and treat as her sister a little obscure girl, whose mother took in fluting, and ironing, and mopping, too, for aught he knew, for a living. Yes, it was hard, and his eyebrows came together, and his hands went further into his pockets, while he sat a moment in silence. Then he said:

“Do you wish it very much?”

“Yes, I wish it,” Edith said, “more than I have wished for anything in years.”

“Then take her,” was the response; and with a kiss of thanks, Edith went back to the sick-room where Mrs. Rogers was now asleep, with her head pillowed on Gertie’s shoulder.

But the slumber did not last long, and when the gray, wet wintry morning looked into the room, Mary Rogers was dead, and what she had tried so hard to tell Edith Schuyler had not been told. Gertie’s grief at first was wild and passionate, but Edith comforted her as best she could, and led her up to her own chamber, the little room where she once had dreamed of future happiness and then wept bitterly over its ruin.

As she entered the apartment and cast her eye upon the opposite wall, she started involuntarily, while the words rose to her lips, “How came my picture here?”

But it was “La Sœur,” which Robert, who was in New York for the winter, had finished and given Gertie permission to hang in her room, and which at first struck Edith forcibly as a likeness of herself when, a girl of fifteen, she used to look from the windows of that room for the coming of Abelard. As she examined it more closely, however, the likeness faded, and she could not see Heloise Fordham in it as plainly as she did at first.

“Edith, my dear,—you really must go now. I cannot allow you to remain any longer,” came from the foot of the stairs, where the colonel was standing, and with a kiss for the desolate child, and a promise to come again before the day was over, 245and to send Norah to stay altogether till after the funeral, Edith joined her impatient lord and was driven rapidly home.

Nor did she return as she had promised, for exposure to the damp night air brought on a severe cold, which confined her to her room, where, on the day of the funeral, she sat looking wistfully in the direction of the cottage, where the hearse was standing before the gate, just as it stood that other day when hers was the only heart which ached for the burden it took away. It was the Schuyler carriage which took Gertie and Norah to the grave, and Edith blessed her husband for this kindness to the girl who was so much to her, and for his thoughtfulness in requesting his daughters and their governess to attend the funeral. He did it for her sake, she knew, and Julia knew so, too, and in Edith’s hearing made some remarks about “the new element which was dragging her father down.”

As yet she did not know that Gertie was coming to the Hill to live. Neither did any one, except Mrs. Tiffe, for Edith thought best not to speak of it during the two or three days when Norah remained at the cottage looking over her cousin’s effects, packing away her things, and separating them from Gertie’s.

In a small tin box, which fastened with a spring, they found several business-like documents, some yellow with age, some fresher-looking, and among them the papers relating to Gertie’s “forty pounds.” These Norah kept to give to Colonel Schuyler; then carelessly glancing at a few of the others, and finding them mostly receipts and papers relating to the bank, now good for nothing, she proposed to Gertie that they burn them. But Gertie said, “No, I may want to look at them some time;” so they were again placed back in the box, which was put away in Gertie’s trunk and the house was set to rights, and the room which Robert Macpherson still kept for his studio when he was in Hampstead was left just as it was, with “La Sœur” removed to its old place on the easel, and at the close of the third day Norah locked the doors, and, with Gertie, passed out into the street, leaving tenantless the cottage for which Godfrey had never taken rent since Mrs. Rogers occupied it.

246
CHAPTER XXXV.
GERTIE AT THE HILL.

t was known now, from Mrs. Tiffe, the housekeeper, down to Jennie, the scullion, that Gertie Westbrooke was to be an inmate of the household, but no one seemed to care particularly, unless it were Kitty, the laundress, who groaned over the extra washing, but consoled herself that the girl would not probably “wear as many frillicks and puffs as the young ladies did.”

With regard in her exact position in the family the servants were at first in doubt, but guessed she was to be either second waiting-maid to their mistress or nurse to the baby, but of this opinion Edith, who overheard their conjectures, disabused them at once.

“Miss Westbrooke is not coming here as waitress or nurse,” she said. “She comes as a young lady of the house, and as such you will treat her with deference and respect.”

The servants glanced curiously at each other, and John, the table-waiter, said he knew now why Miss Julia looked so black at lunch, and whisked so spitefully out of the room.

Julia was furious, and when alone with her father spoke her mind freely to him, asking first if it were true, that Mrs. Schuyler had adopted Gertie Rogers, and was to bring her there to live.

“Not adopted; no, certainly not adopted her,” the colonel said, apologetically, for there was something in his daughter’s black eyes which made him wince a little. “That woman was anxious about her child’s future, and Mrs. Schuyler,—or, rather, we promised to give her a home and an education, but there was no talk of adoption. No, certainly not.”

He was careful to spare Edith as much as possible, and generously said we,—but Julia was not deceived, and answered, indignantly:

“What is Gertie Rogers and that woman to Mrs. Schuyler? 247Are they relatives of hers, that she has so persistently interested herself in them since she first came to Hampstead? It would certainly seem as if they were more than mere chance acquaintances, as she affirms.”

“Julia, hush! I will hear no more!” the colonel said; but Julia would not stop, and continued, hotly:

“I wonder what my mother would say could she know the kind of society to which her children are subjected, and the danger threatening Godfrey.”

“Godfrey!” the colonel repeated, in surprise; and Julia answered him:

“You must have been blind not to have seen the interest he has taken in Gertie Rogers ever since she came here. Why, she has even presumed to criticise his manners and his mode of talk; and he has promised to improve for her sake, and holds her up as a pattern for Alice and me to imitate. If he does this now, when she is in her proper place, what may he not do when he finds her here, an equal, and a daughter of the house, as I understand Mrs. Schuyler says she is to be. Possibly she may yet be the daughter really; and if so, you’ll have yourself to thank.”

Now, Julia had not the slightest fear for Godfrey, and the entire secret of her aversion to the child lay in the interest which Robert Macpherson manifested in her. From the first Julia had appropriated Robert to herself, and was fearfully jealous of any one who stood in her way in the least. She had quarrelled with Rosamond Barton because he once escorted her home from a party, and had refused to speak to Emma for an entire day when she found her in the summer-house alone with Robert, who was reading “Lady Geraldine’s Love” to her; and though Gertie was a mere child, she was even jealous of her because of Robert’s interest in her, and the unbounded praise he so unhesitatingly bestowed upon her. He thought her face the most beautiful he had ever seen, and he had painted her portrait and called it “La Sœur,” and spoke of her so often in Julia’s presence that she began to hate the girl, who had heretofore been only indifferent to her as one beneath her notice; 248and now she was to become an inmate of the family, where Mr. Macpherson would meet her on terms of equality when he came back to Hampstead in the spring; and this was the cause of Julia’s anger, and the reason why she dared talk as she did to her father, who was made quite as uncomfortable as she wished him to be.

Perhaps it was an unwise thing to bring Gertie into the house on terms of equality. She was very pretty. She would, of course, grow prettier with years, while Godfrey was headstrong and impetuous, and might be led to do her harm by attentions which to him would mean nothing, but would, nevertheless, be much to her. The colonel tried to believe that it was only for Gertie that he anticipated harm. Godfrey would never be in earnest, and, consequently, no serious injury could accrue to him, except, indeed, the moral one of deceiving and playing with the feelings of another. The real hurt would fall on Gertie, and for her sake it might have been better if he had left her where she was. Thus Colonel Schuyler reasoned after Julia left him to his own reflections, which finally assumed the conviction that Edith had been foolish, if not unreasonable, to wish Gertie to come there, and he unwise to permit it. But it was too late now. She was expected that very afternoon, and as he went up to look at his boy before going into town, he stumbled over dustpan and broom which were standing before the door of the room opposite Edith’s, and which he knew was to be Gertie Westbrooke’s. Glancing in, he saw a bright fire in the grate, and a pretty bouquet of flowers on the dressing-table, while Edith herself was arranging the chairs and curtains and ornaments upon the mantel.

“Edith, what are you doing here in this cold room?” he said, rather sharply.

He had never spoken to her in this tone of voice, and she turned toward him with a look of surprise in her face as she replied:

“It is not cold; the fire has been kindled some time, and I wanted to see that Gertie’s room was all right. I am so sorry for her, and wish her to feel at home.”

249“Yes, certainly; but, Edith,—Mrs. Schuyler,—my dear,—are you not in danger of spoiling her by making so much of her. You could hardly do more if she were Alice herself, and such people do not often bear sudden elevation.”

“Oh, Howard, what do you mean? You are not sorry we gave her a home?” Edith said, in much perplexity at his manner, as she followed him into the nursery.

“No, not exactly that, certainly not; under the circumstances we could hardly have done otherwise than to give her a home, but we might have stopped there; we need not have made her one of the family, and our having done so may be productive of a great deal of harm. My daughter Julia is already in open rebellion, and has said things which disturb me very much.”

“Julia,” Edith began, indignantly, but checked herself at once, as she met the questioning look in her husband’s eyes, and saw the meeting together of his eyebrows.

Julia had been her only bête noir since the departure of Miss Rossiter, and though they were outwardly extremely polite to each other, Edith knew that she was looked upon by the young lady as an intruder and adventuress, and that the slightest provocation on her part would fan the smouldering fire into a flame.

Not a hint of this, however, had she ever given her husband, who, as she stopped suddenly, said:

“You were going to speak of Julia.”

“Nothing of any consequence,” she replied, “except that I will keep Gertie out of her way as much as possible.”

“Yes, certainly, and now I must go. I have an appointment in town. There’s the carriage at the door. Good-by.”

He kissed her forehead and stooped to kiss his boy, when Edith said hesitatingly:

“By the way, Howard, would you mind driving round by the cottage on your way home and bringing Gertie with you? The snow is so deep and the walking so bad.”

“I shall not have time,” he answered, a little stiffly, as he buttoned his overcoat, “and then, you forget that such people do not mind mud and snow. They are used to it.”

250He was gone before Edith could utter a word, and with a swelling heart she watched him driving down the avenue, and then bending over the cradle of her boy, she shed the first really bitter tears she had known since coming to Schuyler Hill. It is true she had received insolence from Miss Rossiter,, coldness from Julia, and indifference from Alice; but these had weighed little when her husband’s uniform kindness and consideration were in the opposite scale, and now it seemed as if he, too, were against her, and for a time she cried silently, wondering if she had done wrong to befriend the orphan girl, and if her coming there would be the beginning of discord between herself and husband.

“Mrs. Schuyler, please, may I come in? It’s I,—Gertie,” a soft voice said at the door; and starting up Edith went to meet the young girl, and winding her arms around her, kissed her lovingly, while all doubts of right and wrong were swept away with her first glance into the bright, innocent face, and the soft blue eyes looking at her so wonderingly.

Gertie had never expected the carriage to come for her. As the colonel said, she was accustomed to mud and snow, and had walked to the Hill and entered at the side door with Norah, who, knowing the position she was to occupy in the house, took her up stairs at once, and, pointing out her room, left her, while she went to change her wet shoes and stockings. But Gertie could not believe this pretty room was intended for her. There must be some mistake, she thought; and, seeing the door opposite slightly ajar, and knowing it led into the nursery, and that Mrs. Schuyler was probably there, she ventured to knock and ask if she might enter. There was something peculiarly restful about Gertie,—something mesmeric in her presence, which everybody felt for good, and which affected Edith at once, making her forget for a moment her husband’s words and manner.

“I am so glad to have you here, and this is your room,” she said, as she led her into her pleasant chamber. “I wanted you near me and baby, he is so fond of you.”

She removed Gertie’s hood and cloak, and smoothed her rippling 251hair, and thought how pretty she was in black, and wondered where she had seen an expression like that which flashed into the blue eyes and spread over the bright face at her caresses.

It was an hour before dinner, and Gertie spent the time with Edith and in playing with little Jamie, who, at sight of her, gave a coo of delight, and nearly jumped into her arms. He was an active, playful child, and Gertie was sorry when the nurse came to take him, telling Mrs. Schuyler dinner was ready. This was an ordeal Gertie dreaded, and in a kind of nervous terror she cried, “Oh, Mrs. Schuyler, I wish I did not have to go down. Can’t I stay here and eat by myself?”

“Certainly not,” Edith replied, knowing the while that such a thing would be highly satisfactory to one of the young ladies, at least, and possibly to her husband, but, nevertheless, being fully resolved that every privilege of the house, whether great or small, should be awarded to her protégée. “Certainly not, you are one of us now. You are my little girl;” and she passed her arm caressingly around the child. “Watch me, if you like, and do what you see me do.”

Thus reassured, Gertie entered the long dining-room with as much self-possession as if she had done the same thing every day of her life.

“Oh, Gertie, how do you do? And so you are come to live with us,” Emma said, kindly, as she came in, and offering her hand she took her seat at the table, and did not once seem to look at Gertie, whose feelings she wished to spare as much as possible.

With Julia it was different. She called herself a lady, versed in every point of politeness and breeding, and yet she could deliberately stoop to wound a girl who had never injured her, and whose only crime was her poverty. Arrayed in her longest train of dark blue silk, her hair in the very latest style, as reported by Alice Creighton, who was then in New York, she swept haughtily into the room, and with a slight inclination of her head to Edith, and a slighter one to Gertie, took her seat, and while the soup, which she never took, was serving, occupied 252herself with a French novel, occasionally fixing her eyes upon Gertie, who was made very uncomfortable in consequence.

Colonel Schuyler had not yet returned from town, but he came before dinner was over. He was very sorry for the ungraciousness of his manner when talking with his wife of Gertie, and the pained expression of her face had haunted him all the afternoon, and been the cause of his driving round by the cottage on his way home.

“I can at least do that,” he thought; “and the roads are worse than I supposed.”

But the cottage was empty, and the colonel drove home alone, resolving to be very kind to the orphan girl for Edith’s sake and conquer all his fears for Godfrey until he saw something tangible, when it would be time to act. So when he entered the dining-room and met Gertie’s eyes raised so timidly to his, he went to her, and offering her his hand, bade her welcome to his house, and said:

“I drove to the cottage for you, but was too late. I fear you found the walking very bad?”

She had not minded it, she said, while the beaming glance which Edith gave him told him that his peace was made with her, and he became exceedingly urbane, and even talkative, and addressing some pleasant remarks to Gertie, made her feel more at ease, if possible, than Edith’s reassuring words had done. She was very pretty, and graceful, and modest, and he watched her movements with an interest he could not define, and compared her with Alice Creighton and his own daughters, who, so far as beauty was concerned, fell far in the scale.

Emma was very kind to her, and paid her several little attentions during the evening, but Julia preserved the same haughty demeanor she had at first assumed, and never spoke to her or noticed her in any way. When she had once conceived a prejudice, it was very strong, and that night, after retiring to her room, she wrote to her aunt Christine of this “last indignity put upon them,” and wished that she was emancipated from school like Alice, and could leave the home which seemed like home 253no longer. On the receipt of this letter Miss Rossiter wrote to her brother-in-law, saying she had heard of his kindness in giving Gertie Westbrooke a home until something could be done for her, and adding that she had in her mind a plan which would relieve him of the girl and benefit the child as well. She was wanting a little maid to be with her constantly, and Gertie would do nicely after a little training.

“I believe your wife has some Quixotic idea of educating her,” she added, in conclusion, “and without giving my opinion in full with regard to elevating that class of people, I will say that if the girl comes to me I shall myself teach her an hour each day, which I consider all that is necessary, with what she already knows. I hope you will send her as soon as possible, for Alice is to stay with me through Lent so as to be near St. Alban’s, and between us we shall need an extra maid.”

What effect this letter would have had upon the colonel had he received it under ordinary circumstances, I do not know. As it was, it remained unopened for many days, while in an agony of anxiety he watched his baby boy, who lay almost constantly in Gertie’s arms, its little hand holding fast to hers as if fearful of losing her. It was scarlet fever in its most malignant form, and at the very first alarm, Julia, who was afraid of disease in any form, fled to her own chamber, where, like a true niece of her aunt, she burned tar and kept chloride of lime as a disinfectant, and never went near the room where her baby brother was dying. Even the wet-nurse shrank from the fever-smitten child, fearing for the safety of her own little nurseling. But Gertie knew no fear, and from the moment little Jamie opened his heavy eyes at the sound of her voice, and raised his hands to her with the shadow of a smile on his face, she stood by him day and night and held him at the very last upon her lap, hers the last voice which spoke words of endearment to him, and hers the last lips which touched his in life, for Edith was fainting in the adjoining room, and the colonel in his anxiety for her did not know the end had come till he saw Gertie fold the child to her breast, while amid a rain of tears she said: “Poor Jamie 254is in heaven now;” then she laid him gently back in his crib, and the colonel knew his boy was dead.

They telegraphed for Godfrey, and the house was hung with mourning, and Julia stayed in her room and wondered if she would have to wear black, and Emma cried herself sick, and Edith sat motionless as a stone beside her dead baby, with a look of unutterable anguish on her face and no power to speak even had she wished it, for the iron hand was on her throat, and her heart was breaking for more than the dead child beside her.

Who had tended the death-bed of that other one? Who had folded the little hands upon the bosom as Jamie’s were folded? Who had curled the rings of golden hair as Jamie’s were curled? And who had kissed the pretty lips as she kissed these before her? Nobody,—nobody. Hospital nurses had no time for tears or caresses; strangers had buried her baby girl, and she, the mother, had made no sign, either then or since, and God was punishing her for it, and her heart was broken in twain as she sat, white, and still, and speechless, while her husband tried to comfort her.

Then it was that Gertie thought of everything. Gertie carried messages to and from Miss Julia, who unbent to her now that she could make her useful; Gertie comforted poor Emma; Gertie anticipated the colonel’s wishes before they were spoken, and Gertie took the white flowers from the conservatory, and putting them on baby’s pillow, laid her hand pityingly on the bowed head of Edith, who moved at the touch, and looking up, saw the flowers upon the pillow and the girl who had laid them there. Then the iron hand relaxed a little and Edith gasped, “Oh, Gertie, my child, my little one,” while the first tears she had shed began to fall like rain and her body shook with sobs, which did her good, for she was better after the outburst, though she would not leave the room until her husband took her away and put her in her bed, where she lay utterly helpless and prostrate while they buried her boy from her sight.

Godfrey came to the funeral and saw his little brother first in his coffin, and was very decorous, and grave, and kind to both his sisters, and respectful to his father, and solicitous about 255Edith, and attentive to Gertie, whom he called the sunbeam in the house.

“I don’t know what we should do without you now, and I am so glad you are here,” he said to her, on the morning after the funeral, when he stood with her a moment by the window of the drawing-room, and thought how pretty she was, and how womanly she had grown within the last six months.

“How old are you, Gertie?” he asked; and when she told him fourteen last January, he continued: “Almost a young lady. I shall have to hurry up and get to be that perfect gentleman whom you are to reward with a kiss, or you will be refusing to pay; eh, Gertie?”

He spoke playfully and laid his hand lightly on her hair, while a beautiful blush broke over the face which was upturned to his, when a stern voice called:

“Godfrey, my son, I want you;” and Colonel Schuyler stood in the door, with a stern look of disapproval in his eyes.

The colonel had read Miss Rossiter’s letter that morning, and tearing it in a dozen pieces, had answered, saying that the girl who had been so much to his lost boy, and was so much to his dear wife, would henceforth be his special care, and that if Miss Christine wanted a waiting-maid she must look elsewhere, as she could not have Gertie Westbrooke. This letter he had sent to the post; nor was he sorry for it even when he came so unexpectedly upon his son and fancied far more than he saw.

Gertie was too closely connected with his dead boy for him to cast her off; but he could not keep her there, and on the instant he formed the plan that she should be educated away from Schuyler Hill, where Godfrey could not see her until matters between him and Alice were finally adjusted, and he had outgrown any boyish fancy he might entertain for this child.

He had meant at first to keep Godfrey for a few days, but he sent him back at once, and as soon as Edith could bear it, told her of his decision with regard to Gertie, and told her in such a way that she did not venture to oppose him, though her heart ached with a new pain as she thought of losing the girl who seemed so very near to her. After many inquiries it was decided 256that the Misses H——’s school in Buffalo was the place for Gertie, inasmuch as the training there was very thorough; and when in the spring Godfrey came home for a short vacation, bringing Macpherson with him, he was told that Gertie was in Buffalo fitting for a teacher.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
AFTER FOUR YEARS.
“Silently as the spring-time
Its crown of verdure weaves,
And all the trees, on all the hills,
Open their thousand leaves”—

o, silently fled the next four years, and I come now to the glorious day when summer was everywhere, from the perfume of the new-mown hay on the lawn to the golden flecks of sunshine on the river, and the musical hum of happy animal life heard on every side.

I had been an invalid for a long time, and had mingled but little with the outer world. With the affairs at Schuyler Hill, however, I was pretty well acquainted, for Edith and I were great friends now. At first she had stood aloof from me, but when she heard of my illness, she came at once, and, with kind words and many delicate attentions, made my life far happier than it could have been without her. After the little grave was made under the evergreen and Gertie went away, she came to me oftener, and, during the long rides which we took together in her pretty phaeton, she told me much of her life at Schuyler Hill. A very happy life it had been for the most part, though it had its dark side, as what life has not? Miss Rossiter had been a trouble while she stayed, and, even after she was gone, her influence was felt in Julia’s fitful moods and peculiar temper after the receipt of the letters, in which allusions were always made to “that woman who has usurped your poor dear mother’s place.”

257And still Miss Rossiter came every summer to the Hill, and stayed a month or six weeks, and took upon herself such insufferable airs that Edith was glad when she was gone, and made the day of her departure a sort of jubilee.

Julia was now nearly twenty-two, and very handsome it was thought, though her beauty was of that dark, bold, dashing style which I did not admire. Emma, with her paleness and light brown hair, suited me better; for there was a sweet, gentle expression in her face, while in grace of manner and form she far excelled her haughty sister, who patronized her generally.

Since their coming out neither of the young ladies had been much at home, and we missed the style, and dash, and city airs which they used to bring us, and had only Rosamond Barton and Mrs. Schuyler to admire and copy,—except, indeed, on the rare occasions when Gertie was allowed to pass her vacations in Hampstead. I say allowed, for the colonel managed so adroitly that she never came to Schuyler Hill when Godfrey was there or expected, but spent her vacations elsewhere in happy ignorance of the real reason for her banishment.

And so we did not see her often in our quiet town; but when we had her with us it was a season of rejoicing, and we made the most of it. How I used to wait and listen for the rapid step and the clear, ringing voice, which always set my heart throbbing, and did me so much good. I did not wonder that everybody loved her, from old Mrs. Vandeusenhisen in the Hollow, to Tom Barton on the Ridge, and when the former brought me fresh eggs for my breakfast, and told me with a beaming face that “her young lady came home last night looking handsomer than ever,” I knew she meant Gertie Westbrooke; and when Tom Barton looked in and said, with a falter in his voice, “She went this morning,” I knew that he meant Gertie, too, and pitied him for the hope he was cherishing, and which I was sure would never be fulfilled.

Since the memorable day when Mary Rogers spoke so boldly for the child whom she would not have compromised by so much as a breath of gossip, Tom Barton had kept his promise, and guarded the little girl as carefully as if she had been his 258sister, until she ceased to be a little girl, and he saw her in all the bright loveliness of sixteen, and then Tom went down before her charms, and asked her to quit school, and be his wife, and live with him at the Ridge, and snub Miss Julia Schuyler as she had been snubbed by her.

“No, Mr. Barton, I cannot be your wife. No girl would be that, if she loved you ever so much,” Gertie had answered, fearlessly, while Tom blushed painfully, and knew just what she meant, and swore he would reform, and not look so much like a walking beer-barrel.

And he did try to reform, and took the pledge, and broke it in three weeks, and had the delirium tremens, and saw all manner of snakes twisting themselves around Gertie Westbrooke, on whom he called piteously in his agony. Then he took the pledge again, and kept it, and gradually the high color left his face, and his figure began to assume a better shape, and his clothes were not so tight, and he came to see me so often that the meddlesome ones in town wondered if old Ettie Armstrong could be foolish enough to think that boy wanted anything of her!

“Why, she is forty at least,” good Mrs. Smithers said, averring that she knew, because the day I was born their bees swarmed, and her husband broke his neck trying to saw off the limb where they had settled.

Of course such evidence was unanswerable, but as I knew just how old I was, and why Tom Barton visited me so often, I did not care to contradict the story of the bees, and I let Tom Barton come whenever he pleased to talk of his “best girl,” as he called her, and to keep him from the “Golden Eagle,” the low tavern where he had slipped so often.

At last, however, Gertie’s education was finished, and she came home to stay, and the colonel welcomed her kindly, and thought how beautiful she was, and felt his blood stir a little when she raised herself on tiptoe and kissed him as a matter of course. Julia never did that and Emma but seldom, while Edith kept most of her kisses now for the two-year-old boy Arthur, so that the cold, reserved man was not much used to 259kisses of late, and felt the touch of Gertie’s lips for hours, and caught himself contrasting her with Alice Creighton, whom he had last seen so elaborately dressed with powder on her face and every hair seeming to stand on end. But thirty thousand a year covers many defects, and Alice was still the colonel’s ideal of a daughter-in-law when he welcomed Gertie home.

She had been there three months, and on the June morning of which I write I was going up to call upon her for the first time since her return. I found her in the garden, in her big sun-hat and heavy gloves, cutting and arranging flowers with which to decorate the house, for a party of young people was coming from New York that day, and everything and everybody was in a great state of expectancy. During the last year and a half Robert Macpherson had been in Europe looking after his inheritance, which by the death of some one had come indisputably to him at last. Several times he had written to Godfrey urging him to cross the ocean with his sisters and Miss Creighton, and visit him in his Highland home; and as nothing could please the young ladies better, the party had sailed for Europe in time to keep the Easter festival at Glenthorpe, Robert’s handsome country-seat. But they had now returned to New York, and Robert Macpherson was with them, and for a week or more they had been stopping with Miss Rossiter and waiting for Rosamond Barton, who was to accompany them to Hampstead. It was two years since Godfrey was graduated, and since that time he had been studying his profession in the city until he went with his sisters for a short vacation to Europe.

“Only think, I have not seen Godfrey for more than four years, and have almost forgotten how he looks,” Gertie said, after welcoming me to the garden, and telling me of the expected guests. “It is queer that I have not seen him, but he never happened to be home when I was,” she continued, as she gathered up the bouquets and went with me to the house, where she began to distribute the flowers, putting the most, I noticed, in Godfrey’s room, and seeming more interested in that than in all the others.

Edith was in her nursery, and when Gertie’s decorations were 260completed and she came and stood by her, I was struck as I had been more than once before by their resemblance to each other.

They certainly might have been sisters, though Gertie was in her sweet spring-time and Edith in the fulness of her summer. Time had dealt lightly with her, and she looked scarcely older than when she came a bride to Schuyler Hill. She was very happy, too, though I saw she dreaded the coming of the young people from New York. But not for herself. She had reached a height where neither Alice’s haughtiness, nor Julia’s arrogance, nor Miss Rossiter’s insolence, could touch her. She was only anxious for Gertie, who might be treated coldly, if not rudely, by some of the party. And when she remembered the fear which had for so many years influenced every act of her husband toward Gertie, and, looking at the beautiful girl, remembered what Godfrey was, she trembled, notwithstanding the piece of news which she had heard the previous night, and which she communicated to me, with Gertie sitting in the deep window fanning herself with her garden hat, and rubbing the scratch she had received among the roses.

“By the way,” Edith said, “the colonel had a letter from Godfrey last night, and it seems the engagement he has so long desired has at last come about.”

“Whose engagement?” I asked.

“Godfrey’s and Miss Creighton’s.”

“I supposed that was settled long ago.”

“It was by the parents, but not by the parties most interested. Godfrey has never manifested any great degree of fervor, and has rather made light of it, I think; but it is done now, and they will be married as soon as he gets his profession, possibly sooner. The colonel is greatly rejoiced.”

I glanced at Gertie, still rubbing and blowing the scratch on her hand, but if the news of Godfrey’s approaching marriage produced any effect upon her it was not visible. Her bright color was just as bright and her blue eyes just as placid in their expression, unless, indeed, there was a little wonder in them as she looked up quickly and said:

261“A newly engaged couple,—won’t that be nice? How do you suppose Mr. Godfrey will act as an engaged man? I always think of him as a boy, and still he must be twenty-four.”

And yet in her heart there was a shadow of regret that Godfrey should be wasted upon Alice Creighton, who never liked her, and who might make Godfrey dislike her, too.

“She shall not do that,” she thought, when alone in her own room she was reflecting upon the news which had dimmed somewhat the brightness of the day. “I’ll be so kind and good to her that she cannot help liking me, and so I’ll gain her friendship instead of losing Godfrey’s.”

With this end in view, she transferred a part of the flowers from Godfrey’s room to that of his fiancée, where she rearranged the furniture, and into which she brought her own handsome reading chair, Edith’s gift on her last birthday. Remembering Alice’s indolent, lounging habits, and how much she was addicted to what Godfrey called “lying around loose,” she knew the chair would just suit the languid little lady, and placed it by the window where the finest view of the river was to be had. Later in the day she dressed herself for the evening and wore her prettiest white muslin, with the fluted ruffles and ribbons of blue, and then went down to the piazza where the colonel and Edith were waiting for their guests.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE TRAVELLERS,

ere Miss Creighton, Miss Schuyler, Miss Emma Schuyler, Miss Barton, Godfrey, Robert and Tom; and they made a very merry party as they entered the car at the Thirty-first Street station, and with their dash and style and self-assurance of manner seemed to take entire possession of the road and ignore the presence of every one.

“Three gentlemen to four ladies; that’s lucky for one of us,” Tom Barton said, as he quietly appropriated his sister and 262Emma Schuyler to himself, leaving Julia as a matter of course to Robert Macpherson, and Alice to her betrothed.

Good-natured Tom did not care a picayune with whom he talked or sat, so long as he knew he was to dine at Schuyler Hill, and see Gertie with the wonderful eyes and hair, and the shy drooping of her lids and the bright color coming and going in her face just as it did when she told him there was no hope, but bade him be a man all the same for her sake and the sake of the fair girl he would find some day to take her place in his heart. Tom knew he shouldn’t find the girl, but he was trying to be a man, and even Julia Schuyler tolerated him now, and divided her coquetries between him and Robert Macpherson, who was unusually quiet and studied the scenery from the window more than he did the dark, handsome face beside him.

Alice was satisfied to talk with Godfrey, and no one in the car who watched her could help guessing what he was to her, or that she was more delighted with the state of affairs than he. Alice was not Godfrey’s choice, though he was engaged to her, and had been for four days, during which time she had made the most of her new dignity, and shown her lover to as many of her friends as possible, and chosen her own engagement ring, and looked at a corner house far up town, which she wished Godfrey to secure at any cost, as her heart was set upon it. And Godfrey acquiesced in everything, and got the refusal of the house, and went with her to look at some rare bronzes and a $5,000 painting, on which her heart was also set, and played the devoted lover as well as he could, with no shadow of genuine love in the whole affair so far as he was concerned. How he came to be engaged he hardly knew, except that his father desired it, while Alice herself expected it, and people had talked of it so long that he had gradually come to consider it as something he must take as a matter of course, just as he took the measles, and the mumps, and the chicken-pox. And yet it was very sudden at the last. “A word and a blow,” he said to Robert, who asked why he looked so white when, after the deed was done, he went to call on his friend at the hotel.

“White,” Godfrey replied. “I guess you’d be white, too, if 263you’d been and gone and got engaged as I have! Why, Bob, I feel as I did when I was a little shaver, and swallowed a rusty copper, and Aunt Christine slapped me on the back, till the copper flew half way across the room, and I was black as your hat. I say, Bob, hit me a cut or two, and see if I can’t throw this up.”

With a merry laugh Robert replied:

“I don’t believe you’ll throw up thirty thousand a year as easily as you did the rusty copper; but tell me about it. How did it happen, and when?”

“Why, you see,” Godfrey rejoined, “I always supposed it would have to come, father was so anxious, and mother, too, before she died; but I guess a chap is never in a hurry to take what he is sure of, and I’ve staved it off, and never even looked love at her, except in a joking way, until this morning, when I went to call upon her at Uncle Calvert’s, and found her so pale and pensive, the result of that abominable sea-sickness, from which you know she suffered the voyage home. Now there is nothing strikes to my stomach quite so quick as sea-sickness, and I felt sorry for her, and when she told me how lonesome she was at Uncle Calvert’s, with the everlasting din of those street cars in her ears, and cried a little, why, I—I—I began to feel kind of, well, just as any chap would feel sitting by a nice girl, who, he knows, expects to marry him, with a tear running down the side of her nose, and so it was very easy for me to pick up her fat, white hands,—she has pretty hands,—and pat them a little, and say: ‘Suppose we get married, Alice, and then you can live with me, and not have to stay in this poky house. Shall we, Alice?’”

“‘Yes, Godfrey,’ she said, and then,—well, I’ll leave something to your imagination, only the thing is settled, and we are to go to Tiffany’s this afternoon and get the ring, and to-morrow we look at that show-house up town, which Larkin built and failed in, and I am to write to father, and the news will be over Hampstead when we get there, and I feel, as I told you, much as I did when I swallowed the cent!”

This was Godfrey’s account of his engagement, from which 264the reader will infer that so far as his heart was concerned there was very little of it in the matter. But he did not love any one else, and that was in Alice’s favor; and she managed him so adroitly that he made a very well behaved lover, deferring to all her wishes, and treating her with attention, and even a show of tenderness when they were alone.

Once, on the day before they went to Hampstead, Robert said to him:

“By the way, Schuyler, is ‘La Sœur’ at the Hill?”

“‘La Sœur!’ Gertie, you mean,” Godfrey replied. “I really do not know whether she has left school or not. Nobody ever mentions her in any of their letters, and I’ve lost track of her entirely. I wrote to her two or three times when she first went off to school, but she did not answer, and so I gave it up. Why, it’s four years and a half since I saw her. She must be a young lady by this time. I say, Bob, do you suppose she is as sweet and pretty now as she was when you painted that picture? I thought her then the daintiest creature I had ever seen.”

Before Robert could reply there was a knock on the door, and Tom Barton was ushered in. He had come from Hampstead by the morning train, and called to see his old friends when he learned where they were. With Gertie fresh in his mind, Godfrey said to him:

“Barton, do you know if that little girl we almost pulled caps over once is at the Hill now?”

“Do you mean Miss Westbrooke?” Tom said, in a tone which made Godfrey turn quickly to look at him, while a suspicion which hurt him strangely flashed through his mind.

“Yes, I mean Miss Westbrooke. She is a young lady now, I suppose. Is she at home, and pretty as ever?”

Tom had heard from his sister of Godfrey’s engagement, and as the world had long ago given Robert Macpherson to Julia Schuyler, he had nothing to dread from either, and launched forth at once into praises of Gertie Westbrooke, the most beautiful creature upon whom the sun ever shone, as well as the purest, and sweetest, and best.

265“Why, there is not a man, woman, or child in Hampstead that would not fall down and worship her if she wished it.”

“Upon my word, Tom, you must be far gone,” Godfrey said, with that little hurt still in his heart. “I should not wonder if you and I were in the same boat, eh?”

He looked curiously at Tom, who answered him frankly and sadly withal:

“No, Godfrey, she won’t have a drunken dog like me. She told me so herself,—not in those words, to be sure, but in the sweet, gentle way she has of telling the truth for one’s good. I swore then I’d reform, and I have not been drunk in a year, and if I ever am a man again, it will be Gertie Westbrooke who saved me, Heaven bless her!”

There was a tremor in Tom’s voice as he said this, and then added, abruptly:

“Yes, she’s at the Hill. You’ll see her when you get home.”

And so when Godfrey sat at last in the railway car beside his betrothed, to whom he paid the attentions she required of him, his thoughts were not so much with her as with the girl at Schuyler Hill, whom every man, woman and child admired, if Tom’s word was to be trusted. Alice, too, thought of her, and calling across the aisle to Julia, asked:

“Is that Westbrooke girl at Schuyler Hill?”

“I believe so,” Julia replied, adding, as she saw the look of interest in Robert’s face: “I think she is a kind of companion for Mrs. Schuyler, and will, perhaps, be little Arthur’s governess. You know father educated her for a teacher?”

“I saw her last winter,” Rosamond Barton said; “and really, girls, she has the most beautiful face and form I ever looked at. Everything about her is perfect. You’ll have to paint her again, Mr. Macpherson. Your first picture does not do her justice now.”

Robert bowed, while Julia said, snappishly:

“Indeed, I am most anxious to behold this paragon. I have not seen her either for two years or more. She had a very red nose then.”

“Yes, but it came from a bad cold,” Emma quickly interposed, 266ready now as ever to defend the right; and then the conversation touching Gertie ceased, and a few moments after the whistle sounded, and the party had reached the Hampstead station.

They walked to the house, and Gertie watched them as they came up the avenue,—Tom, Rosamond and Emma, Robert Macpherson and Julia, and lastly Godfrey and Alice, he carrying her shawl and travelling satchel, and she looking up into his face in that matter of course, assured kind of way she had assumed since her engagement.

But Godfrey had other occupation than attending to her and her pretty coquetries. His eyes had travelled up the road, across the lawn to the broad piazza, and the young girl standing there, clothed in white, with the blue ribbons round her waist and the bright hair on her neck. And that he knew was Gertie; not much taller than when he saw her last, but grown and rounded into beautiful womanhood, which showed itself even at that distance, though not in all its fulness. That came to him when at last he stood with her hand in his looking into her upturned face and drinking in with every glance fresh draughts of her wondrous beauty, which so bewildered and intoxicated him that until Alice spoke to him twice and asked for her satchel he did not hear her. Then releasing Gertie’s hand, he turned to Alice and said:

“I beg your pardon. I did not know you were speaking to me.”

Then he kissed Edith, and tossed little Arthur in his arms, and shook his father’s hand, and greeted the servants with his old freedom and kindness of manner, while Gertie stood just where he left her, thinking how differently it had all happened from what she had expected.

Mr. Macpherson had been glad to see her, and had shown it, and so had Emma and Rosamond, while Alice had offered her two fingers, and said, in a formal way, “Happy to meet you,” and Julia had offered one finger with a nod and a “how d’ye do, Gertie,” but Godfrey had not said one word! He had merely taken her hand and held it, and looked at her, not quite 267as friend looks at friend after an absence of years, but in a way which puzzled and perplexed her, and made her heart throb quickly, and the color deepen on her cheeks. How handsome he was, and how changed in some respects from the tall, slender youth, who seemed all legs and arms, but who now in the fulness of manhood was not one inch too tall. All the lankness of his boyhood was gone, but the grace and suppleness remained, and his erect form and square shoulders would have become the finest officer that ever drilled his pupils at West Point. On the face, once so smooth and fair, there was a rich brown beard now, and the hair had taken a darker tinge, and curling a little at the ends lay in thick masses around his broad white brow. Even his eyes were softened, though they still brimmed with fun and mischief, and tenderness, too, as Gertie knew when they were gazing into hers.

“What do you think of Godfrey?”

It was Tom Barton who asked the question, and starting from her dreamy attitude, Gertie replied:

“I think him the most splendid-looking man I ever saw.”

“That’s so,” Tom answered, warmly, while Gertie, who had no wish to talk with him further then, passed into the house and went to her own room.

It was six o’clock, and with a hasty glance at herself in the mirror, and a thought that her personal appearance mattered nothing to any one, she went down to the parlor, where the family usually assembled before going in to dinner. They were all there now, talking and laughing in little groups, except Godfrey, who stood apart from the others, leaning his elbow on the mantel and watching the door as if expecting some one to enter. He had mentally commented on the ladies as they came in, pronouncing Edith beautiful, Julia handsome, Emma graceful and stylish, Rosamond pretty and sweet, and Alice stunning and fashionable; and now he was waiting for the girl in the simple white muslin, who came at last, without the aid of Parisian toilet or ornament of any kind, and eclipsed the whole, just as the morning sun obscures the daylight and makes itself the centre of light and glory. There was no shadow of 268embarrassment perceptible as she entered the parlor, but her manner was that of a daughter of the house rather than an inferior, as she crossed the long room and joined the group by the bay-window. There was a supercilious stare from Julia, a little nod from Alice, and a welcoming smile from Edith, Emma, and Rosamond; and then the conversation flowed on again until the dinner-bell rang, and the party filed off in pairs to the dining-room. As a matter of course, Godfrey took Alice, while Julia fell naturally to Robert, and Tom was left with three girls on his hands.

“I can’t beau you all, so I guess I’ll take my pick,” he said, as he offered his arm to Gertie, while his sister and Emma followed behind.

And so it came about that Tom was seated between Gertie and Julia Schuyler, who, not satisfied with the attentions of Mr. Macpherson, tried her best to attract Tom also, and keep him from talking to Gertie.

“Not any wine?” she said, as he drew his glass away when the decanter was passed. “That is something new. You’ll surely take a little with me. It is some of father’s very best.”

Tom knew that as well or better than she did, and the smell and the demon in the cup moving itself upright was tempting him sorely, while Julia’s seductive smile and words of entreaty were more than he could endure, and forgetting what even a taste involved he raised the glass, while Rosamond, sitting opposite, looked pale and anxious, and distressed. But ere a drop had touched his lips, a hand pressed his arm, and a soft voice said, “Don’t.”

Instantly the glass went down upon the table with so much force that the wine was spilled upon the cloth, while Julia muttered, under her breath, “Upon my word!” as she cast a lightning glance upon Gertie, whose face flushed, but whose blue eyes smiled approvingly upon poor Tom, and intoxicated him almost as much as the colonel’s best wine could have done, only in a different way.

“You are a darling,” Rosamond whispered to her, when at a late hour she and her brother were saying good-by to the 269young people at the Hill. “Nobody but you could have kept Tom from drinking. I shall tell mother about it.”

Tom, too, subdued, and ashamed that he had been so near falling again, and very grateful to his deliverer, whispered his words of thankfulness.

“You are my good angel, Gertie; but for you I should have been as drunk as a fool by this time. Heaven bless you as you deserve!”

Then the brother and sister went away, and the young ladies, tired and sleepy, started for their rooms, Alice looking around for Godfrey, with whom she would gladly have tarried a little longer to hear the soft nothings which she liked and had a right to expect from him. But Godfrey had disappeared, and only Gertie stood at the end of the broad piazza, leaning against a pillar, with the moonlight falling full upon her as she looked off upon the river and the mountains beyond, wondering at the strange unrest which filled her soul, and at the coldness of Godfrey toward her. As yet he had not addressed her a word since he came home, neither had she spoken to him. To be sure there had been a reason for this, for since the moment of his arrival, when he held her hand in his and looked so curiously at her, he had been occupied with some one else. His seat at dinner had been far away from hers. After dinner she had sat an hour or so with little Arthur, whom she always put to sleep, and on her return to the drawing-room she had at once been claimed by Tom Barton, who kept constantly at her side until he bade her good-night. So Godfrey was not so much to blame, and she acquitted him of intentional neglect, but felt a little hurt and grieved, and was saying to herself, “He does not care for me now,” when a voice said, close to her ear, “Gertie!”

It was Godfrey’s, and he was there beside her, looking into her face, on which the moonlight shone so brightly. He had eluded Alice, and when he heard her voice in her own room he stole out upon the piazza, intending to walk up and down a while before retiring to rest. First, however, he made the circuit of the building and glanced up at the room in 270the south wing, which he had heard from Edith was Gertie’s. But the windows were dark; Gertie was not there; or, being there, must have retired, and he retraced his steps to the piazza in front, where he saw the little, white-robed figure leaning over the railing. That was Gertie, and he went swiftly to her side, and spoke the one word, “Gertie,” which brought the color to her cheeks, while the sparkle of the blue eyes, lifted so quickly, kindled a strange fire in his veins, and made him shiver as if he were cold.

“What, Godfrey?” Gertie answered softly, her eyes confronting him steadily a moment, and then dropping beneath his ardent gaze.

“Gertie, do you know you have not spoken to me since I came home? And I thought you would be so glad to see me.”

There was reproach in his tone, and it went to Gertie’s heart, and her voice trembled as she replied:

“I am glad to see you, Godfrey, gladder than you can guess. I thought so much of your coming, and then when you came home you never spoke to me.”

There certainly was a tear on the long eyelashes, and tears on Gertie’s eyelashes were very different things from tears on Alice’s nose, and the impulsive Godfrey snatched up the hand which rested on the railing and held it fast in his own, as he said:

“Do you know why I did not speak to you? I could not, I was so completely confounded and bewildered to find you what you are. Tom Barton,—by the way, Gertie, you certainly have no intention of marrying Tom Barton, if he reforms a hundred times?”

“No, Godfrey, I have not.”

“I thought so. Well, Tom raved about you by the hour, and said you were beautiful; but that does not express it. I wonder now if you know just how you look.”

She did not answer him, and he went on:

“It is more than four years since I saw you, and I had you in my mind as the little girl I used to tease at the cottage, and 271who used to criticise me so severely. Petite you are still, it is true, but so changed in everything else, so completely a woman, that for a few moments I think I must have been sorry, feeling as I did that I had lost my little mentor in more ways than one.”

He was looking fixedly at her, with strange, wild words trembling on his lips, but there was a bar between him and the bright beauty which so dazzled and fascinated him,—a thought of Alice, the light from whose window was shining down upon the shrubbery, and whose voice, as she leaned from the casement, was heard saying to some one: “Yes, she really is very pretty, but has no style whatever.”

“Style be——” Godfrey did not say what, for a look in the blue eyes checked him; but he deepened his grasp on the hand he held, and his breath came hard as he said: “Gertie, you have not yet congratulated me upon my prospects. Do you not think I have chosen well?”

To Gertie it did not seem as if he had chosen well. He had nothing in common with Alice Creighton, but she did not tell him so, and she was wondering how she should answer him, when again the voice above them rang out, clear and loud:

“I have no fear of that. Her pretty face may attract Godfrey, and lead him to say soft nothings to her on the sly. All men do that, but I fancy I have influence enough to keep him from going far astray.”

“Oh, Godfrey, I must not stay here any longer. It is too much like listening. Let me go, please!” Gertie said, trying to release her hand.

But Godfrey held her fast, saying to her:

“It is not listening. If Alice does not wish us to hear, let her talk in her room, and not out of the window. I cannot let you go yet. I want you all to myself for a little while. I may not get another chance.”

He smiled bitterly, and then laying his disengaged hand on Gertie’s shoulder he suddenly asked:

“Why did you not answer my letters, Gertie?”

“Your letters, Godfrey! What letters? I never received a line from you,” Gertie said, while Godfrey rejoined:

272“Never received a line from me! That is very strange!—and I wrote to you three different times. Think, Gertie,—try to recall it. Fours years ago, when you first went to school, and I came home and found you gone, I wrote from here how disappointed I was not to see you, and asked you to correspond with me, and let me be your brother. You were my little sister, I said; I adopted you as such, and I said a heap more soft nothings, as Alice might call them, though I was very much in earnest at the time, and to myself called you ‘La Sœur’ always. And you never received that letter?”

“Never, Godfrey. I should remember that, and you say you wrote again?”

“Yes, from Andover; and sent my photograph, and asked for yours in return, and bet fifty dollars with some students that I’d show them the handsomest picture they ever saw, and I waited so anxiously for it; but it never came, and at last I wrote again, and told you to go to thunder! I did, upon my word, I felt so piqued and slighted, and I said I meant to go to the bad, and smoke, and drink, and swear, and do everything I could think of.”

“Oh, Godfrey, Godfrey! You didn’t, though, I hope!” Gertie cried, while her fingers tightened around the hand holding them so fast.

“Yes, I did,—for a little while. I drank a lot of wine, which went to my head, and smoked three cigars, which went to my stomach, and made me feel worse than sea-sickness, if that were possible. I was crazy as a loon, and smashed everything in my room, and sang uproarious songs; and, when one of the tutors came to see what was up, I called him a fool, and threw the wash-bowl at his head. Of course I was reprimanded, and reported to father, who came to see about it, and paid for the furniture, and talked so good that I promised to do better, and I did. And you say you never received those letters?”

“Never, Godfrey. I should have answered them,” Gertie said, while Godfrey continued: “And if you had, Gertie,—I might,—oh, who knows what might have been!”

He was holding both her hands and looking down upon her 273as no man ought to look upon a girl when he is engaged to another. Some such thought as this must have crossed Gertie’s mind, for she released herself from him suddenly, and said:

“It is very late, Godfrey. I must go in now.”

“No, Gertie, please,” and he still tried to detain her. “Wait a little longer. I am yours to-night; to-morrow I am some one’s else, and must come under orders, you know.”

He spoke ironically, and then as he saw that Gertie was really leaving him, he continued:

“By the way, Gertie, one thing more, and you may go. Do you remember the forlorn sick little girl who sat on the deck years ago, and the bold, impudent fellow who made her so angry, and the promise she gave him on certain conditions?”

Gertie’s cheeks were scarlet, as she replied: “Yes, Godfrey, I remember it.”

“Well, then, can you redeem the promise now?”

There was the old saucy look in his eyes, mingled with another look, which Gertie could not mistake, and stepping backward as he bent toward her, she answered him: “No, you are not a gentleman, or you would not remind me of that now!”

She was gone, and he heard her step as she went up the stairs and through the hall of the south wing to her own room, and he was alone in the quiet night, wondering what spell was upon him, and if it really were himself standing there, so bewildered and perplexed.

“I’ll walk down the avenue and back as fast as I can, and see if that brings me to myself,” he said, and he tried it, and went to the little cottage, where Gertie used to live, and stood leaning over the fence, and recalling the time when he first saw her there working in the garden with the flush on her cheeks, and her bright hair floating back from her face.

And then he remembered her as he had just seen her, grown to glorious womanhood, with eyes whose glances intoxicated him as he had never been intoxicated since the memorable college spree. Then he walked back again to the house on the 274Hill, every window of which was darkened, and whose inmates were asleep. But for himself, he felt that he should never sleep again with those two conflicting sensations battling so fiercely in his heart, one cutting like a sharp, keen knife, when he remembered Alice and the words spoken to her less than a week ago, and the other thrilling him with ecstasy and a sense of delicious joy when he thought of the sweet, serene face on which the moonlight had fallen, softening and subduing, and making it like the face of an angel.

Godfrey was in love! He knew it at last, and exclaimed:

“I am in love with Gertie Westbrooke, and believe I have been ever since I first saw her years ago in London. But the knowledge of it has come too late. No Schuyler ever yet broke his word, and I shall not break mine. But if she had received my letters it might have been so different.”

And why had she not received them? How could three letters go astray? Certainly he directed them aright. He surely did the one sent to Schuyler Hill. He had written to his father at the same time and received an answer to that. Why, then, did Gertie not get hers? Had there been foul play, and if so, where and by whom? Suddenly there flashed into his mind a suspicion which made him start, while a strange gleam shone in his eyes, as he said:

“I’ll know the truth to-morrow.”

It was to-morrow now, for the early summer morning was shining on the mountain tops, and tired and excited, Godfrey went at last to his room to get a little rest before the household was astir.

275
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
COLONEL SCHUYLER INTERVIEWS GODFREY.

odfrey, I wish to see you for a few moments,” the colonel said to his son when towards noon he found him in the library alone.

“Certainly, I wish to see you, too,” Godfrey replied, as he arose and followed his father to the little office in the rear of the house, where the colonel transacted his business.

Colonel Schuyler did not know exactly what he wished to say to his son, and after they were seated there ensued a moment’s silence, which Godfrey broke by saying:

“What is it, father? What do you want with me?”

“Oh, yes, sure. I—I—wish to speak of this affair,—your engagement, you know, and arrange about the marriage, and when it will take place. The sooner the better, I think, as I do not believe in long engagements.”

“But, father, I have not my profession yet,” Godfrey said, feeling again the cutting pain as he thought of being really tied to Alice, with no longer a right to think of that sweet face which had looked at him through the moonlight and made his heart throb so fast.

“Yes, I know; but you can finish your studies after marriage,” the colonel replied; and seeing Godfrey about to speak again, he continued: “I need not tell you how glad I am of this engagement, which I have hoped for so long. Alice is a fine girl,—a very fine girl; not as handsome, perhaps, as some,” he said, as he guessed what was in Godfrey’s mind, and thought, himself, of a rare type of beauty, which moved even him at times.

“No, Miss Creighton is not a beauty,—I should think not,” Godfrey interrupted, impatiently, whereupon the colonel brought his eyebrows together, and regarding his son curiously, went on:

“Such girls as Alice, I have often noticed, grow into fine-looking old ladies; so they have the advantage in one respect.”

276“Yes; but who cares or thinks of a good-looking old wife!” Godfrey said, petulantly.

But his father did not seem to notice his petulance, and continued:

“Your Uncle Calvert writes me that you looked at a house which Alice would like. Did it suit you as well?”

“Yes; I found no fault with it except its size. It will cost one fortune to furnish it, and another to run it according to Alice’s ideas,” Godfrey answered, crisply, seeing, even then, as in a vision, a lovely little cottage somewhere among the hills in the quiet country, with just room enough in it for himself and one more, and that one, alas! not Alice.

“Thirty thousand a year ought to run most any house; and that, I believe, is Miss Creighton’s income,” was the colonel’s remark, to which there was no reply; and he continued: “I think we may as well secure this house at once. I will write to your Uncle Calvert to-day; and, Godfrey, it will suit me to have the marriage consummated soon,—say some time in the autumn. Shall I call Alice, and see if she is willing?”

He arose to touch the bell, when Godfrey interposed, and grasping his father’s arm, said quickly:

“Father, listen to me! My engagement was a hasty thing, brought about Heaven only knows how, and now I will not commit a second blunder by allowing myself to be driven into a hasty marriage.”

“Godfrey, my son!”—and now the colonel roused a little,—“one would think your heart was not in this marriage, which I desire so much!”

There was no answer from Godfrey, and the colonel went on:

“I trust you knew your own mind when you offered yourself to Alice, and that you have no thought of drawing back. Remember, that for many generations a Schuyler has never broken his word; they have all been men of honor, and my son must not be the first to disgrace us.”

Godfrey was white now, even to his lips, and his voice shook as he replied:

277“You need not fear for me, I shall keep my word to Alice. The Schuylers will not be disgraced by me. And now, father, one question to you. The Schuylers, you say, were all men of honor, and I put it to your honor to answer me truly. Four years ago last spring, when I came home from Andover and found Gertie Westbrooke gone, I was terribly disappointed. That child,—she was one then,—had a powerful hold on me, and by her purity of principle and plain way of speaking to me was doing me untold good, and I wanted to see her again and hear what she had to say. But she was gone, and so I wrote to her, and gave the letter to you to post just as I would have given you one for Bob. It may seem strange that I remember it so distinctly. But I do. You were going out with letters in your hand and I gave you that, but never heard from it afterward. After waiting awhile for an answer I wrote again from school with a like result, and then when I knew she was here I wrote again, and directed to your care. Do you know why neither of these letters ever reached her, for they did not? She told me so last night when I asked her why she did not reply.”

He was looking steadily at his father, whose eyes were cast down as he replied:

“My son, I have to beg your pardon there. It was not an honorable thing to do, though I did it for the best. I never sent the letter committed to my care, and I wrote to Miss ——, the preceptress, sending her a specimen of your writing, and asking her if any letter came to Gertie Westbrooke, directed in that hand, to withhold it from her and mail it back to me. She did so, and when your third and last arrived I kept it also, and have them now unopened and unread.”

“And truly that was a very honorable thing for one to do who talks to me of honor! May I ask why you did it?” Godfrey said, his young face flushing and his voice full of anger.

“I did it to prevent possible trouble. I knew how much you were interested in the girl, and I did not wish to have her harmed.”

“Father!” and Godfrey’s voice rang with surprise and scorn. “You knew me. I am your son, and you knew that sooner than 278dishonor any woman I would part with my life; much less then would I harm a hair of the head of one who has been to me the sweetest thing I ever knew since I first saw her years ago in England. You had nothing to fear for her. There was some other reason. Will you tell me what it was, honestly?—the Schuylers are men of honor, you know!”

To this appeal the colonel answered a little hotly:

“Yes, Godfrey, I will tell you the truth. I feared an entanglement which might interfere with the wish of my life. I knew how beautiful, and sweet, and pure Gertie was just as well as you. But she is not a fitting wife for you. She has neither money, name, nor friends.”

“How do you know that? Mary Rogers always said she was a lady born,” Godfrey exclaimed impetuously, and his father replied:

“When Mary died and the child came here to live, I took pains to inquire into her antecedents, and wrote to the firm where her annuity is invested. But they could tell me nothing; the business had been done by Mrs. Rogers as guardian of the child, and I came to regard the big house and the high-born mother as a myth. No, Gertie has no friends, no money, no name, and I would not see you throw yourself away as you might have done had the correspondence been permitted to go on. Believe me, Godfrey, I acted for the best. It was your mother’s dying wish that you should marry Alice, and for her sake, if for no other, you will not break your word.”

“I have no intention of breaking my word. I am engaged to Alice, and shall marry her in time, but if it were to do again, I should think twice before I made a promise I find so hard to keep; for, father, we will have no more concealments. I love Gertie Westbrooke so much that I would rather live with her on a crust a day than share with another all the splendors of the world. It is no sudden passion either. She has been in my heart constantly, though absence and silence had dimmed the picture a little, and I thought of her always as a child. But when I saw her yesterday in the full bloom of womanhood, and compared her with Alice and my sisters and all the girls I ever 279saw, I knew that for me there was no other woman living, no other love which could ever touch my heart and make it throb just as it does now at the mere mention of her. I love her better than my life, and love her all the more for knowing she is not for me. I have promised to marry Alice and shall keep my word, unless she releases me of her own free will. But I will not be hurried into matrimony. I will have my profession first and keep my freedom a little longer. You need not bargain for that house; I shall not need it. I presume our conference is ended, and if you will excuse me I’ll go where I can breathe; the atmosphere of this room is stifling.”

He arose precipitately, and, with a bow to his father, rushed into the open air, and going to the stables bade John saddle Bedouin, his favorite mare and pet.

“Surely, Mr. Godfrey, you will not ride in this dreadful heat. It will kill the mare. She has not been much used to exercise lately,” John said, for he knew his young master’s partiality for fast and long riding, and dreaded the effect on Bedouin, a beautiful young chestnut mare with graceful, flowing mane.

But Godfrey was not in a mood to consider either horse-flesh or heat. He must do something to work off that load weighing so heavily upon his heart, and mounting Bedouin and giving her full rein, he went tearing down the avenue at headlong speed and off into the country, mile after mile, while the people in the farm-houses looked curiously after him, wondering if it were a case of life or death, or if he were some felon escaping from justice. On and on he went, knowing nothing of the flecks of white foam gathering all over Bedouin’s body, and knowing nothing how fast or how far he was riding, or that he had turned and was going toward home, until, on a sudden, the poor beast began to reel, and with a few plunges came heavily to the ground just before the door of Mrs. Vandeusenhisen. In a trice the good woman was at his side, followed by the twins whose interest in the struggling steed was greater than in the young man picking himself up and rubbing his bruised knee.

“Poor Bedouin. I’m afraid it’s all over with you,” Godfrey said as he knelt by the dying brute, whom he tenderly caressed, 280and who seemed to understand him. “Poor Bedouin, poor pet, I did not mean to kill you. I am so sorry. Poor little lady,” he kept repeating, as he held the horse’s head on his arm and gazed into the dying eyes, where there was almost a human look of love and pardon as the noble beast expired.

“He’s a goner, sure,” came from one of the twins, as the horse ceased to breathe and Godfrey bent to undo the fastenings of the saddle.

“What is it? Is any one hurt? Oh, Godfrey, is that you? What is the matter?” was spoken in a voice which made Godfrey start, and turning round he saw Gertie in the door.

She had been sitting with old Mrs. Vandeusenhisen, who was sick, and hearing the noise outside had come to see what was the matter.

“Are you hurt? What is it? Oh, Godfrey, Bedouin is dead! What have you been doing?” she asked, with tears in her eyes and reproach in her voice.

“Been exorcising the demon within me, and believe I’ve succeeded in casting it out, but at the cost of Beddy’s life. Poor Beddy! I hope she’s gone where she’ll have nothing to do but eat clover and kick up her heels the blessed day,” Godfrey answered playfully, trying to make light of it, though in truth his heart was very heavy as he removed the saddle and bridle, and calling to some men working on the road at a little distance, made arrangements with them for burying his horse.

Then turning to Gertie he said:

“I am at your service now, if you are ready to go home. It must be near dinner-time.”

And so the two walked slowly down the street and up the long avenue towards the group of girls, who, in their airy evening dresses, stood watching them as they came.

“Where have you been this scorching afternoon?” Alice asked, with a cloud upon her face.

“I have been to read to old Mrs. Vandeusenhisen. I go there almost every day,” Gertie replied, as she went quietly into the house and up to her room to dress for dinner.

“And you have been reading to old Mrs. Van, too?” Alice 281asked of Godfrey, who replied by telling her what had happened to Bedouin.

“The weather was too hot and I rode too fast,” he said. “John warned me of the danger, but I did not listen, and now Bedouin is dead and I am two hundred dollars out of pocket, with a reputation for fastness and cruelty, no doubt, which would bring Bergh about my ears, if he were only here in Hampstead.”

“But are you hurt, Godfrey? Oh, I’m afraid you are. Look, your pants are all dirt,” Alice cried, clinging to him with a pretty affectation of concern, which, if the “demon had not been exorcised,” would have disgusted and made him angry, but which in his present mood he was inclined to humor and laugh at.

He had made up his mind to make the best of his situation and bear the burden bravely. Alice was his betrothed, and had a right to cling to him and be anxious if she chose, and he let her do it, and even wound his arm around her as he assured her of his perfect safety.

“Now, then, you must let me go and dress for dinner,” he said, as the first bell rang out its summons, and breaking away from her he ran up to his room, where he bathed his face and hands and said to himself, as he looked in the glass and saw how pale he was:

“It’s a hard thing, old fellow, but you will have to pull through. No Schuyler ever yet broke his word.”

He was very attentive to Alice that night, while in her delight at his attentions she forgave Gertie for walking with him from Mrs. Vandeusenhisen’s, though the germ of jealousy was planted in her mind, and she resolved to keep a close watch of the girl, who, with blanched cheeks and throbbing pulse, was, at that very hour, listening to what very nearly concerned the little heiress of thirty thousand a year.

282
CHAPTER XXXIX.
COL. SCHUYLER INTERVIEWS GERTIE.

ol. Schuyler was not quite satisfied with his interview with Godfrey, or his promise to keep his word and marry Alice Creighton. No doubt he meant to do it, but Godfrey was impulsive and hot-headed, and loved another with a depth and fervency which astonished the coldblooded man. All day he had been haunted with the flushed, excited face, and the thrilling voice which had said so passionately, “I love Gertie Westbrooke so much that I would rather live with her on a crust a day than share with another the splendors of the world.”

Perhaps during the long summer days, when they would be thrown together, he would forget his word of honor, and tell her of his love, and what then? She would listen, of course, unless some powerful obstacle were interposed to keep her from it, and that obstacle the colonel would interpose in the shape of Gertie’s own promise and sense of honor. He could trust her better than his son, and he meant to put her to the test, even if by doing it he wrung her heart cruelly, and awoke within her a sleeping passion, of whose existence she possibly did not know. And yet the colonel had no antipathy to Gertie; on the contrary, he liked her very much, and thought hers the most beautiful face he had ever seen, if he excepted Edith’s, which it in some respects resembled, and had Gertie’s forty pounds a year been forty thousand, or even half that amount, he would have given the preference to her, notwithstanding she had no family, or friends, or name. But the colonel held money high, and prized the luxuries which money brings, and did not wish to live without them. And money was not quite as plentiful with Col. Schuyler as it once had been. He had met with some heavy losses recently, and now that little Arthur had come, and other children might yet call him father, Godfrey’s fortune would be much less than he had hoped to make it, and so Godfrey 283must marry rich, and his love be put aside, and Gertie must help to do it, and be the means, if need be, of breaking her own and Godfrey’s heart.

“Gertie,” he said to her, very pleasantly and affably, when just before dark he found her watering a bed of geraniums near the south wing windows; “Gertie, can I see you alone a few moments? I have something to say to you.”

“Certainly,” she answered, and putting down her watering-pot, and taking off her garden gloves and hat, she followed him to the same room where, earlier in the day, Godfrey had declared his love for her, and where now she was to promise to reject that love should it ever be offered to her, for that was the colonel’s intention. He knew Gertie well enough to know that her word once passed she would keep it, though her heart broke in the keeping. But how should he commence? What should he say to the young girl whose blue eyes were confronting him so steadily?

“Gertie,” he began at last, “I brought you here to ask a favor of you; a great favor, which I hope you will grant.”

“Yes, Col. Schuyler, anything I can do for you, I will,” she said, and he went on:

“I have been kind to you, Gertie, have I not, ever since you first came to live with us?”

“Yes, very, very kind,” Gertie answered, wondering at the question, and his reason for reminding her of the kindness.

“I have tried to do you good,” he said, speaking with a little hesitancy now; “first for Mrs. Schuyler’s sake, and lastly because I liked you myself, and was greatly interested in you, and felt that you were no ordinary girl. I tell you this to let you know that the favor I have to ask has nothing to do with you personally. I am your friend, and will be so as long as I live, and provide for you at my death, or sooner if you marry, as you probably will,—girls like you always do, and I,—yes I——”

What was he going to say to her, Gertie wondered, a thought of Tom Barton crossing her mind? Was Col. Schuyler about to advocate his cause? Impossible, she said to herself, and waited impatiently for him to proceed. But she was not at all 284prepared for the abrupt question with which he finally plunged into the business.

“Gertie, has my son ever made love to you? That is, has he ever said or done anything which under some circumstances might give you reason to think him more interested in you than in another?”

There was a violent start, and Gertie’s face was crimson as she looked across the table at the man questioning her thus, while her thoughts leaped backward to the previous night and the eyes which had looked so tenderly upon her, the hands which had held hers so fast, and the voice so full of passion telling her of the lost letters and saying to her so sadly:

“If you had received them, Gertie,—if you had, I might, oh, who knows what might have been?”

All day long the remembrance of that interview had been in her mind, filling her with a delicious feeling of happiness that Godfrey did care for her, and bringing occasionally a pang of regret as she wondered what would have been had she received his letters. She had never dreamed of marriage in connection with Godfrey. She had always supposed that he belonged to Alice, and so she did not know the real nature of the emotions Godfrey’s language the previous night had called into being until Col. Schuyler tore the veil away and laid her heart before her, bare and palpitating with love for Godfrey, his son. What right had he to question her thus, and how could she answer him, she asked herself, as, with her hands locked together, and the love whose existence she had just discovered swelling and surging in her heart, now with throbs of anguish as she remembered Alice, and now with beats of joy as she thought of Godfrey, she sat motionless and silent, until the colonel spoke again:

“You do not answer me, and from that I infer he has made love to you. Was it last night? He told me he talked with you. Gertie, this must not be. Godfrey is bound to Alice. It was settled years ago in our families. It was his mother’s dying wish. It is the one thing I desire above all others. I have nothing against you, Gertie,—nothing; but Godfrey must 285marry Alice, and you must not let him break his word to her.”

He spoke rapidly, glancing only once at the face opposite, which was white as ashes, and he could see the slight figure sway a little from side to side, while a sound like a smothered sob broke on his ear, and then Gertie spoke, very low and very decidedly, but with no anger in her voice.

“Col. Schuyler, you need not fear for Godfrey. He never made love to me, though I think,—I believe it would be easy for me to tempt him to do so, but I shall not try. I will not be the serpent in your Eden, or sting the hand which has fed me. You have been too kind to me for that. I shall not prove ungrateful.”

“God bless you, Gertie. I was sure you would do right. It is more necessary to me than you know that Godfrey should marry Alice, and you have lifted a great burden from my heart. Godfrey is impulsive and hot-headed, and easily influenced, and seeing you every day might be won from his allegiance, especially as I do not think his whole heart is in this marriage; but it must be, and, Gertie, if he should come to you with words of love, promise me you will refuse to listen. I shall feel secure then. I can trust you, I know. Will you promise, Gertie?”

He held his hand toward the little, cold, white fingers resting on the table, and which crept slowly on till they lay in his grasp, while Gertie said:

“I promise, Colonel Schuyler; but,—but,—Godfrey,—I did not know before that I loved him so much until now that I am giving him up forever.”

Oh, what a piteous voice it was, and how the slight frame shook with suppressed sobs and tears while the colonel sat watching and wishing so much to comfort her. But he could not, and he let her cry on for a few moments, when he said:

“Gertie, your distress pains me greatly, but you are young and will outlive this fancy; and, Gertie, it has occurred to me that you may wish to go away for the summer while the young people are here, but I would rather you should stay. Mrs. 286Schuyler would be very unhappy without you, while Godfrey, I think, would be discontented and follow you, perhaps. It is better, on the whole, to stay: and Gertie, I need not ask that this interview shall be a secret between us. Not even my wife must know of it.”

Gertie hesitated a moment, and then replied:

“Colonel Schuyler, if a time ever comes when Godfrey speaks to me of love I shall refuse him, as I promised, but I shall tell him why. I must do that, you know!”

And with this Colonel Schuyler was obliged to be content. He had gained his point, and looked upon his son’s marriage with Alice as a sure thing, and he felt very kind and tender toward the young girl whose heart he had wrung so cruelly, and whose sad face smote him as he bade her good-night and blessed her for what she had promised.

The next morning Gertie was suffering from a severe headache and did not appear at breakfast or lunch, but she was better in the afternoon and was able to walk to Edith’s boudoir, where she lay upon the couch and had her dinner brought to her. As she was about to eat it a voice said at the door: “May I come in?” and, without waiting for an answer, Godfrey entered the room. He had heard from Edith that she was there, and declining the dessert, had excused himself from the table and gone directly to her.

“See, I have brought you a pond lily and a bunch of blue violets, because I remembered how much you used to like them. The violets are just the color of your eyes,” he said, as he held them so close to her that his hand touched her white cheek and sent the hot blood to it suddenly.

Then, drawing his chair close to her couch, he began to talk as easily and naturally as if the sight of her, so pale and languid and sweet, were not stirring within him a wild tornado of feeling which, had he known of the answering throb in her heart, might have burst its bonds and trampled down every right of the little lady coming down the hall ostensibly to call on Gertie, but really to know for herself if Godfrey was there with her!

“And so you are taking your dessert here? Really, Miss 287Westbrooke, I shall object to this,” Alice said, as she entered the room, trying to speak playfully, though there was that in her eyes which warned Godfrey not to provoke her too far if he would avoid a scene. Spying the lily she snatched it up, exclaiming: “The very thing I was wanting for my hair! Where did it come from?”

Gertie glanced at Godfrey, who explained:

“It was the only one the boy had, or I would have bought more.”

“Oh, you brought it to her, then?” Alice said, dropping it as suddenly as if it had been plague-smitten, while Gertie said, entreatingly:

“Please keep it, Miss Creighton, I really do not care for it.”

“Neither do I, thank you;” and with a very low bow Alice left the room, waiting at the end of the hall till Godfrey saw fit to join her.

There was something of a quarrel between the two lovers, who walked down the garden to a retired summer-house, where, Godfrey said, they could have it out, bidding Alice “scratch and bite like a little cat, if she wanted to.”

“I don’t want to scratch nor bite, and I ain’t a little cat, but I do not think it fair in you to admire that girl so much, and take her lilies and violets and things, and you engaged to me,” Alice sobbed, while Godfrey, who knew that she really had just cause for complaint, tried to appease her, and promised not to offend again so far as Gertie was concerned.

“Though I do like her,” he said, “and always shall; but I intend to be loyal to you, Allie, and mean to make you happy, and I want you to remember that, and not flare up every time I happen to look at a girl.”

And Alice promised that she would not, and took his proffered kiss of reconciliation very graciously, and when, in the early dusk of the warm summer night, I walked up to the Hill to call on the young ladies, I found the engaged pair sitting by themselves at the far end of the piazza, Alice with her hand clasping Godfrey’s arm, while she told him something to which he seemed 288to listen in a preoccupied kind of way, as if he hardly knew what she was saying to him.

CHAPTER XL.
ROBERT MACPHERSON INTERVIEWS GERTIE.

ertie was quite well the next day, and took her usual place at the table, and when breakfast was over and Godfrey and the young ladies had gone to ride, she strolled out to the little cemetery, which looked so cool and inviting with the white marble gleaming through the evergreens and climbing vines. Scarcely was she seated there when she heard footsteps near, and saw Robert Macpherson coming rapidly toward her.

“Excuse me,” he said, “I have followed you here because I wanted to be alone while I gave you something, and told you something which should have been told and given before, only,—” he paused a moment, looking both embarrassed and distressed, and then continued hastily: “I am a coward and a fool! Gertie, were you ever ashamed to tell who you were?”

“What do you mean?” Gertie asked, looking curiously at him.

“I mean that my blood is a little mixed,” he answered, “but I will explain that by and by, and now to my business. I think you have several times pressed flowers which grew on this grave” (pointing to Abelard’s), “and sent them to his mother.”

“Yes. I have pressed them for Mrs. Schuyler to send two or three times when she had not the leisure, and have written for her to the sweet-faced old lady of whom she once told me,” Gertie said, and Robert rejoined: “I saw that old lady when I was abroad the last time, and when she heard I was coming here she told me of Mrs. Schuyler, whom she had seen, and of the ‘bonnie young lassie’ who took such care of her boy’s grave, and sent her flowers from it, and she wrote you a letter, Gertie, because she said you seemed very near to her, and she 289sent you some ‘Cairngorms’ for a necklace and earrings. They have been in the family for years, and she intended them for her oldest grand-daughter, but she died, and there is no other, so she sent them to you, knowing that Mrs. Schuyler can have far more precious stones, though I think these very handsome; they are almost as fine as a topaz,—look,” and he handed her a box in which were several very fine Cairngorms of that variety found in Aberdeenshire.

“Oh, how pretty, how beautiful!” Gertie exclaimed, holding them to the light. “And she sent them to me? I do not understand it.”

“Read her letter and you will see how much she is interested in you,” Robert said, handing Gertie a large, unsealed letter, directed in a very peculiar hand, and which I will give in part, avoiding as much as possible the broad Scotch which made it so unintelligible that Robert was obliged himself to read it to Gertie before she clearly understood it.

“My bonnie lassie,” it began, “an old crone from over the sea sends you her blessing and prayers for the care you’ve tooken of my puir laddie’s grave, and the posys you’ve sent, and the letters you’ve writ with the same, and which fetches you very near to my heart and love, and so I send you these stones from Can-Gorrum, to wear round your bonny neck, and in yer pretty ears. My grandson, Robert, will tell you how his puir mother had them, and gie them to me when I was cauld, and hungry, and sair; but I dinna sell them for the siller, as she thinket I moight. I weatherit the storm, Jinnie and me, and kep ’em for her ain sweet bairn, Dolly, who died; and it’s not the loikes of Jinnie to wear sic as these, and her lassies bein’ all lads, I sends them to you with my blessin’, and duty to the beautiful Ladye Skiller, and so I greet you; God bless you, good-by.

“Mistress Dorathy Lyle,
“by her grandson Robert.”
Gertie had listened intently until the point was reached where reference was made to my “grandson Robert,” when she started up, exclaiming:

290“What?”

“Wait,” Robert said; “wait till I am through,” and, with a shaking voice, he finished the letter, laying a good deal of emphasis upon the last words, “by my grandson Robert.”

“Her grandson! What does she mean, Mr. Macpherson? Does she mean you?” Gertie asked, and Robert replied:

“Yes, Gertie, she means me. I am that woman’s grandchild, the son of her daughter, and I am going to tell you about it.”

He spoke rapidly, and Gertie had no chance to interrupt him as he went on.

“My mother was Dorothea Lyle, born in Alnwick, in the same thatched cottage Mrs. Schuyler has undoubtedly described to you. She was the eldest child and beautiful,—the Lyles are all good-looking, and mother was pre-eminently so, with a tolerable education, too, acquired from a lady in the neighborhood who was interested in her, and in whose house she was a nursery governess. It was there she met my father, the youngest son of an old Scotch family, which had a title in reversion and a good deal of money. It was a runaway match, which the proud Macphersons tried to overthrow. But they could not, and if they had, my father would have married his beautiful Dolly again. He was very fond of her, and taught her a great deal himself, so that my first recollections of her are of as fine a lady in speech and manner as any I have ever seen. I was born in Naples, where father tried to earn his living by painting, for he was a natural artist and we were very poor, as his family turned him off and would not receive him with his wife.

“It was about this time that Mrs. Lyle wrote to mother of sickness and destitution, and asked for money in her need, but alas, we had none, and mother sent these Cairngorms, which father bought for her when she was married, and which they had never been able to have set for herself. She thought her mother could sell them for bread, but she would not. Her fortunes brightened a little just then, and she kept the stones carefully, meaning them for my sister on her bridal day; but that day never came. I told you of my sister once, and that you looked 291like her. She was so beautiful, and I loved her so much, but she died when she was twelve years old, and the only picture we had of her was burned. Our fortunes were mending then. The Macpherson mother was dead, and the father sent us money, and when mother died, two years after Dora, father and I were invited to Glenthorpe, in the north of Scotland, and there father died, and by my grandfather’s will I came into possession, at his death, of a large sum of money, and now, by another death, I have a right, if I choose, to take my wife to Glenthorpe, should I ever have one, which I probably never shall, for the girl I love is too proud to marry me, knowing who I am.”

Gertie thought of Julia Schuyler, but she did not speak, and after a moment Robert continued:

“You wonder, perhaps, why I never told this before, and I blush to own that I was ashamed to do it and acknowledge that I was anything to this man by whose grave I stand, or anything to that family whom Mr. and Mrs. Schuyler and Godfrey have seen. I think people who have been very poor, and have come up from the great unwashed, have that feeling more than those to the manor born, and though I have tried to be kind to my mother’s friends so far as gifts are concerned, I have shrunk from coming in contact with them, especially the Aunt Nesbit, of whom it is no slander to say she is very coarse.

“I went first to see them years ago, just before coming to America, and when I heard of their acquaintance with the Schuylers I hesitated about crossing the sea with Godfrey, but was finally persuaded and came to Hampstead where I have felt like a criminal every time allusion has been made to Abelard Lyle. Last March I went again to see them, and, coward that I am, did not tell them I had been here, only that I was coming, and then Mrs. Lyle, my grandmother, spoke of you, and asked me to bring the letter and the Cairngorms. I could not refuse, and knew then I must tell you everything, and I have, except, indeed, of my father’s family, which ranks among the first in Scotland. Glenthorpe is a beautiful place and will be my home in future, for I am the only male heir left to that estate.

292“I have told you my story, Gertie, and will not ask you to keep my secret. The sooner it is divulged the better, perhaps, as I shall then know the worst there is to know, with regard to the girl I love. She will never marry a carpenter’s nephew; her father would not permit it either.”

He seemed to be waiting for a reply, and Gertie said at last:

“Col. Schuyler is very proud, and she is prouder than he, I think; but Glenthorpe may reconcile her to a great deal. You must tell her yourself, however. I shall not help you there.”

“But, Gertie, do you think she cares for me? You girls can judge of each other better than men can judge of you. Does she like me ever so little, think you?”

Remembering how, from the first, Julia had appropriated Robert to herself, seeming jealous and angry of his slightest attention to another, Gertie replied:

“If you should ask her to be your wife, and tell her nothing of the Lyles, I am sure she would say yes,” and with that answer Robert was obliged to be content, but there was a shadow on his face, which lasted for a week or more, and which Julia’s blandishments and coquetries had no power to remove. Indeed, he hardly seemed to notice them or her, and when Godfrey rallied him, and asked what was the matter, he answered that he was pining for Glenthorpe, and began to talk seriously of going back to Scotland; but to this Godfrey would not listen, and when Julia’s eyes looked at him pleadingly as she said: “Don’t go till fall, Mr. Macpherson;” while Emma, who seldom said much, expressed a strong desire for him to remain, he give up Glenthorpe for the summer, and stayed at Schuyler Hill.

Meantime Gertie’s present had been shown, and discussed, and admired by Edith, and Emma, and Godfrey, while Alice wondered if they were real Cairngorms, and Julia had said, in Robert’s hearing, that she’d like to see herself wearing stones which came from such a source, and the colonel had offered to send them to New York and have them set handsomely. But this Gertie would not permit. She had a plan in her mind which she hoped some day to carry out, and test Miss Julia’s unwillingness to “wear stones from such a source” as that white-haired 293woman over the sea, whom the proud beauty teasingly called “Gertie’s godmother.”

CHAPTER XLI.
A FEW DETAILS OF THAT SUMMER IN HAMPSTEAD.

here were many guests at the Bartons’, and the Montgomeries’, and the Morrises, that summer, but nowhere was there so much hilarity and mirth as at Schuyler Hill, for there from time to time came dashing, brilliant people from New York and Philadelphia, and every room was full, and Godfrey took a small apartment in the attic, and made many jokes upon the high life he was enjoying. There were sails upon the river, and excursions to the mountains, and picnics in the woods, and dances on the piazza, and croquet parties on the lawn, and dinners, and suppers, and breakfasts, and lunches, and private theatricals in the great drawing-room; and toward the close of the summer there was a grand party at the Ridge House, to which the young people from the Hill were bidden, and Alice’s toilet was wonderful in texture and style, while Julia was pronounced the most beautiful lady there, until Gertie came, in her simple muslin dress, and eclipsed them all. It was rather late when she entered the crowded rooms, and after greeting Mrs. Barton and Rosamond drifted away from the colonel, who had accompanied her, and found herself close to Godfrey before she was aware of his proximity. Since that promise to his father, she had studiously avoided him, and Alice had no just cause for jealousy so far as Gertie was concerned. Godfrey, too, had made up his mind to accept his fate, and kept aloof from Gertie as much as possible, though there was a world of kindness in his voice whenever he spoke to her, and he always knew when she came in and when she went out, and his eyes followed her with a longing, hungry look, which Alice would have resented, had she noticed it and 294interpreted it aright. But she was not quick to see, and as Godfrey was very attentive to her, and called her his little cat, and teased her unmercifully, and kissed her every morning, she was satisfied and happy, and on the night of the party stood, flushed and triumphant, at his side, while he fanned her heated face, telling her she must not dance again for an hour at least, no matter who asked her; it was too warm for such exercise, and he preferred the open air; he did not mean to dance himself if he could help it, and if Alice liked they’d go out upon the west balcony, where it was cooler.

There had been a cloud on Godfrey’s face the entire evening, and his eyes were constantly wandering over the moving throng in quest of one they did not see.

“Where is Miss Westbrooke?” Tom Barton had asked him anxiously, but Godfrey could not tell him.

She was intending to come with his father, he said, and possibly had not yet arrived; and as the festivity was nothing to Tom without Gertie, he sauntered away to an open window, and when Rosamond asked him to dance with a young lady who was a guest at the Ridge House, and who had been a wallflower all the evening, he answered, “Oh, bother! I can’t; it’s too hot. I’m melting now,” and stepped through the window upon the balcony to be out of the way.

Neither he nor Godfrey cared to dance, though both had in their minds a graceful little figure which they would gladly have whirled about the room, and when at last she appeared and came upon Godfrey just as he had proposed going out upon the piazza with Alice, he forgot everything but his surprise and delight at seeing her, and exclaimed, joyfully:

“Oh, Gertie, I’m so glad you have come. I’ve been waiting for you to dance with me. Come, they are just forming a new set.”

He held both his arms toward her, and Gertie, unmindful of everything and seeing nothing but the look in Godfrey’s eyes and the arms held to her, went straight into them, thinking to herself, “For just this once,—I may be happy with him.”

And she was happy, and Godfrey, too,—and people looked 295admiringly at the handsome pair, and strangers asked who the beautiful girl with the bright hair and simple dress was, and where she came from.

I was at the party that night, and stood very near to Alice, when Gertie came in and was snatched up so quickly by Godfrey. I had heard him announce his intention not to dance, and ask Alice to go with him where it was cooler, and Alice had taken a step toward the door when Gertie came and changed the entire aspect of affairs.

“Godfrey,” I heard Alice say, as her lover moved away from her, but Godfrey was deaf and blind to everything but the girl on his arm, and Alice called in vain.

Godfrey had teased her for her red face, but it was pale enough now, and her small eyes had in them a greenish light as they followed Godfrey’s tall form and caught occasional glimpses of Gertie’s long, bright curls which came below her waist and were the wonder of the room. Alice was very indignant, and when the question was put to her, “Who is that beautiful girl dancing with Mr. Schuyler?” she stood on tiptoe, and pretending to be looking toward the dancers, answered with suppressed bitterness:

“Oh, that is Gertie Westbrooke, a girl who lives with Mrs. Schuyler, and sees a little to Arthur,—a kind of nursery governess, I believe.”

“Ah, yes, thank you,” and Mrs. Jamieson, from Philadelphia, put up her glass to look again at the girl “who lived with Mrs. Schuyler and was a kind of nursery governess.”

Meanwhile Godfrey and Gertie were unmindful of everything but the fact that for a brief space they were together, hand touching hand in a clasp of love rather than form, and eye meeting eye with a sad, remorseful kind of pitying tenderness, as if each knew they were tasting forbidden fruit and for the last time, too. This, at least, was Godfrey’s thought. To-morrow it would all be over, and he would be Alice’s again, but to-night he was Gertie’s and she was his, and he abandoned himself to the delight until he seemed intoxicated with happiness. He had never danced with her since the memorable 296church sociable years ago, when she was a little, airy, restless humming-bird, who had infused something of her own life and elasticity into his rather languid movements and made him try to be worthy of his partner. Gertie was very young then, and no thought of calling her his had entered Godfrey’s heart, where now the sad refrain was repeating itself over and over again, “It might have been, It might have been.”

There was another dance, and another, and then Godfrey led Gertie out upon the west balcony where he had proposed taking Alice, and where he now sat down with Gertie at his side, and looking into her eyes of blue forgot the eyes of gray which had followed his every movement, and in which were little gleams of fire when they saw him going out, and the care he took to wrap Gertie’s cloak around her arms and shoulders. It certainly was not chance which led Alice that way; she went on purpose with a group of heated girls eager for a breath of air, and her garments swept against Gertie’s as she went by, and the green eyes looked at Godfrey with a look he understood and did not resent, for he knew that he deserved it, but he was not penitent and he did not give Gertie up until his father, who had been talking politics in a distant room, and did not know of his son’s misdemeanor, came to find her and take her out to supper. Then Godfrey went in quest of Alice, but she was already appropriated by a young Bostonian, who waxed his mustache and wore a quizzing glass on his nose, and her only answer was a little defiant snort when Godfrey said: “I see I am too late.” So Godfrey took me out and was restless and excited and full of life and fun. But I saw that his spirits were forced, and that his eyes went often to the part of the room where Gertie stood, surrounded by a group of gentlemen who were ostensibly talking to Colonel Schuyler, but really admiring her as the most beautiful lady there. Alice was standing near us, and once Godfrey offered her some lobster salad with a comical look on his face, but Alice did not take it or respond to him in any way, and I knew there was a quarrel in store for him, and pitied him because he was answerable for his actions to that little pug-nosed lady whose only attraction, beside a 297certain grace and piquancy of manner, was thirty thousand a year.

I do not think she spoke to him again that night, and I know she did not ride home with him, for I saw the four girls from the Hill stowed away with Colonel Schuyler, and heard Godfrey tell his father not to send the carriage back, as he and Robert preferred to walk. And so the party was over and one heart at least was sadder for it, and one was in a wild tumult of joy and regret as it recalled glances and tones which meant so much and which had come too late to be of any avail.

CHAPTER XLII.
THE SAIL ON THE RIVER.

he morning succeeding the party was hot and sultry, and two, at least, of the young ladies at Schuyler Hill were cross, and tired, and worn when they joined the family at breakfast. Alice had slept but little, and her temper was still at the boiling point when she went down to the table, where she scarcely spoke at all, while Julia, who had a headache, was not much better. Both were fagged out, and after breakfast announced their intention to keep their rooms the entire morning.

“But I thought we were to have a sail up the river, and call at the Piersons’,” Godfrey said; and Alice, to whom the remark was addressed, replied:

“I’ve changed my mind, and do not care to go. You can take Gertie in my place.”

“Very well,” Godfrey answered, accepting the gauntlet she threw down; and going at once to Gertie, he explained that he and Robert and his sisters were going to call upon the Misses Pierson, and he would like her to accompany them.

Of all the city people in the neighborhood the Piersons had been the most polite to Gertie, and she signified at once her willingness to go. Ten was the hour fixed upon, and before 298that time came Alice had changed her mind, and when Godfrey and Robert joined the ladies upon the piazza, preparatory to starting, they found Miss Creighton with them, her face a little brighter and herself very anxious about her fluted dress, which she was afraid would be crumpled with so many in the boat. Gertie paid no attention to the hint, and of all the party seemed to enjoy the sail and the call the most. The Misses Pierson were glad to see them, and kept them till after lunch, when Godfrey hurried them to the boat, pointing out a mass of thunder-clouds in the west, and saying they must get home before the shower. There was ample time for it, he said, but for once he miscalculated, and though he and Robert rowed with all their strength, they were but little more than half way across the river when the first rain-drops began to fall, and in a few moments the storm was upon them in peals of thunder and dashes of rain and gusts of wind which rocked the boat from side to side, and made Alice cry out with fear as she sprang up to avoid a wave which came plashing in and wet her fluted dress.

“Keep quiet, Allie, or you’ll upset the boat,” Godfrey said, sternly.

Alice began to cry, and whimpered that her dress was spoiled, and said some of them ought not to have come; there were too many in the boat, and she knew it all the while.

“Why didn’t you stay out, then?” Julia asked; and then Alice cried harder, and wrung her hands in fear as peal after peal of thunder rolled over their heads and crashed up the mountain side, while the lurid lightning, flash after flash, broke through the inky sky, and blinding sheets of rain and wind swept down the river, threatening each moment to engulf the boat, as yet riding the waves so bravely. It was a terrible storm, and seemed to increase each moment, while the white faces looked at each other anxiously, and the pale lips made no sound until Godfrey’s oar snapped in two, and a wave carried it far out upon the angry waters. Then Alice shrieked: “We are lost; we shall all be drowned,” and bounding up she lost her balance and fell heavily across one side of the boat, which was instantly upset, and six human beings were struggling madly in the river.

299“Godfrey, Godfrey,” two voices called above the storm, one loud, piercing and peremptory as if it had the right, the other tender, beseeching and low, as of a spirit going out into the darkness and saying a farewell to one it had loved so fondly.

Two voices called, “Godfrey, Godfrey,” above the storm; but Godfrey heard only one, and freeing himself from something which held him fast, and which in his mad excitement he did not know was a pair of clinging hands, he struck out for the place where, just above the water, he caught one glimpse of a white, scared face, and tresses of long bright hair disappearing from his sight. With a courage and energy born of love and despair he reached the spot, and plunging his hand beneath the wave, reached for the long bright hair, felt it, clutched it firmly, and drew again into view the pallid face on which the hue of death had settled, and winding his arm about the slender waist, swam for the shore, which was fortunately so near that his feet soon touched the bottom, and he struggled up the bank with his unconscious burden. Laying it gently down, and pressing one kiss upon the white lips, he turned to retrace his steps, for a thought of Alice and his sisters had come over him, but when he saw them at some little distance down the river, struggling on their feet, he went back to Gertie, who lay in the same death-like swoon, with her hands folded upon her breast, and a smile wreathing her lips, as if her last thought had been one of peace and happiness. Very gently Godfrey lifted her up, and wringing the water from her hair, held her head upon his breast while he showered kiss after kiss upon her forehead and lips, murmuring as he did so: “Gertie, my darling, you cannot, you must not be dead. Oh, Gertie, open your eyes on me once, and hear me tell how much I love you.”

But the eyes did not unclose, nor the lips he kissed so passionately kiss him back again, and without knowing to whom he spoke, or stopping to think who was standing by him, he said, so sadly:

“Gertie is dead.”

There was a rain of tears upon his face as he spoke, and a look of anguish in his eyes, but he met with no answering 300sympathy from the motionless figure near him. It was Alice, who stood there drenched to the skin, the fluting and the starch all out of her dress, the crimp all out of her hair, and the fire of a hundred volcanoes in the eyes which gazed so pitilessly upon the unconscious Gertie, while a smile of bitter scorn curled her lips and intense anger sounded in her voice as she said:

“Godfrey Schuyler, from this moment our paths diverge. I can have no faith in one who deliberately thrusts aside his promised wife to save the life of another. You did this, Godfrey Schuyler, when you knew I was drowning, and I hate you for it, and give you back your freedom with your ring.”

Alice’s temper had increased with every word she uttered, and snatching off the superb diamond selected by herself at Tiffany’s, she threw it toward Godfrey, who, stunned and bewildered, did not at first realize what she was saying, or what she meant by it. A faint recollection he had of being clutched by somebody in the water and freeing himself from the grasp, but he did not know it was Alice, who, when she realized that he was putting her from him, felt that all hope was gone, until Julia’s voice called out: “Cling to the boat, Alice; cling to the boat, as I am doing.”

The next she knew she was clinging to the boat to which she and Julia held until aid came from two boatmen who had been near them on the river when the accident occurred, and who took them safely to the shore, which Robert had reached before them with Emma at his side! Julia had been deserted, too, and though Robert had not put her from him, he had made no effort to save her, but had grasped her sister’s arm and said, in her hearing: “Don’t be afraid, Emma, darling, the shore is very near; keep your head above the water and I will not let you drown.”

But for the name Emma, Julia might have fancied he made a mistake, but that settled it beyond a doubt; and a pain like the cut of a knife ran through her heart as she held to the side of the boat, and saw her sister borne away by one whom she had appropriated to herself so long. Once safe upon the land 301she went to the spot where Robert stood wringing the water from her sister’s dress, and then, overcome with nervousness, and terror, and bitter disappointment, she uttered a low cry and fell half fainting upon the sand. Ordinarily, Alice would have stopped to help her, but her interest was centred in that other group, farther up the river, and making her way thither, she reached it in time to hear Godfrey’s words: “Open your eyes once more and hear me tell how much I love you!”

And he who said this was her promised husband, and she to whom he said it an obscure girl, whom, a few weeks since, Alice would have thought it impossible for one in Godfrey’s position really to love. Even now she could not believe him in earnest, but there was bitter anger and resentment in her heart, prompting her in the heat of her passion to give him back his freedom with the ring, which, striking against his shoulder, bounded off and fell on Gertie’s death-white face.

“Don’t, you hurt her,” Godfrey said, softly, as he picked up the ring and turned it over in his hand, while a perception of the truth began to dawn upon him.

“What did you say?” he asked; and Alice replied:

“I told you you were free to love your Gertie all you please, and I meant it, too, for I hate you.”

“Thank you, Alice; thank you so much, only it has come too late,” Godfrey replied; and slipping the ring upon Gertie’s cold finger, he continued, “See, it fits; and I’d rather have it there on her dead hand than on the hand of any other woman living, but it is there too late.”

Was he going crazy because of that pale girl lying there in a state so near resembling death, that it was not strange for the eye of love to be mistaken? Alice did not know; but something in his voice and manner roused the little womanly sympathy she had remaining in her then, and she said to him sharply: “I tell you she is not dead. It is only a faint, but she ought to have care. Take her somewhere, can’t you? or let these men do it for you;” and she turned to the boatmen who had saved her own and Julia’s life, and who had now come up with offers of assistance.

302“She must be seen to; she’s in a swound,” they said, pointing to Gertie. “Shall we carry her to the town?”

But Godfrey would not let them touch her, and buoyed up with hope which gave him strength, he gathered the limp form in his arms and ran rather than walked toward the village.

Our house stands at the entrance of the town just on the brow of the hill, and as the storm was over I had opened the door to let in the cool, sweet air, when I saw the strange procession coming,—Godfrey with something in his arms, which I at first mistook for a child, so small it looked and so closely he held it to him; Alice following after, more like a mermaid in appearance than the ruffled and fluted and furbelowed young lady whom I was wont to see, and the two boatmen bringing up the rear with Godfrey’s hat and Alice’s parasol.

“What is it, Godfrey?” I asked, as I went out to meet him, and when I saw what it was, I bade him bring her in at once, for there was no time to lose.

He laid her on my bed, and then, while one of the men went for the doctor, we did for her all we had heard must be done for the drowning, and with such good result, that when the doctor came the patient had already shown signs of returning consciousness, and the breath was plainly perceptible through the pale lips whose first word was, “Godfrey, save me!”

She thought herself still in the river, and when Godfrey, unmindful of us all, and caring little that just outside the door Alice watched and waited, bent over her, and said:

“I am here, darling; I have saved you!” she put up both her arms and wound them round him with a convulsive clasp, while Alice came a step nearer, and stood within the room. She had exchanged her saturated clothes for a suit of mine, and with a shawl wrapped about her, stood, with chattering teeth, watching Godfrey as he unclasped the hands from his neck and rubbed them with his own, and rubbed the fair arms, and the pale forehead, and smoothed the long, damp hair, and gave the restoratives, until the blue eyes unclosed and looked at him with something more than recognition in their glance. Then Godfrey was persuaded to leave her and don the dry garments 303of my brother, which had been waiting for him in an adjoining room.

As he passed out he stumbled over a little crumpled figure sitting upon a stool just inside the door, and looking down upon it, he saw that it was Alice.

“Why, Allie,” he exclaimed; “I thought you had gone home! Have you been here all the time?”

“Yes, Godfrey, all the time!” and a tear stood on Alice’s eyelashes, and her voice was not much like the voice which an hour before had said so bitterly, “I hate you.”

Alice never harbored resentment long, and her heart was very sore as she recalled the scene on the river-bank, and wondered if Godfrey had taken her angry words in earnest and felt himself free from her. He could not,—he must not,—he was not free. He had been hers for years, and though she did not know what love was in its full extent, she had a pride in him and a liking for him such as she had never felt for any other man, and as she sat there by the door and watched him bending over the still form on the bed, she was conscious of a new sensation throbbing through her heart, and when he passed her on his way out she could hardly restrain herself from stopping him and suing for pardon. She did not mean what she said when in her madness she had set him free, and thrown back the ring now flashing on Gertie’s finger. Alice knew where it was, and watched it with a strange gleam in her eyes, while a resolution was forming in her mind. The ring was hers, and she would have it; and rising from her seat she went swiftly to the bedside, and seizing Gertie’s hand, wrenched the ring from the unresisting finger and placed it on her own.

The act must have hurt Gertie, for she winced, and, opening her eyes, said:

“Is it you, Miss Creighton? Are you safe?”

Alice did not reply: she had heard the sound of wheels, and hastened out to meet Col. Schuyler and Edith, who had come to take her and Gertie to the Hill.

Julia had recovered from her half-faint, and, supported by Robert and Emma, had walked home, and gone at once to her 304room, where she was attended by her maid; while Emma and Robert explained what had happened, and told where the rest of the party could be found.

Greatly alarmed at the account given of Gertie, Edith had come at once to take her home, if possible; but this neither the doctor nor myself thought advisable. It was better for her to remain quietly where she was for a few days, and so the carriage returned without her, Edith promising to come again the next morning and see how she was.

CHAPTER XLIII.
THE COURSE OF LOVE DOES NOT RUN SMOOTH.

ust before leaving, Godfrey went to Gertie, and, bending over her whispered a few words so low that no one heard them except the one for whom they were intended, and whose eye brightened as he said:

“Good-by, darling. I must go now, but shall come early to-morrow morning.”

He was holding her hand, and he noticed the absence of the ring and the scratch the stone had made when it was wrenched away. Instantly a cloud passed over his face and he looked searchingly at Gertie, but she knew nothing; and then he glanced at me.

“Ettie, if you find anything of value about Gertie’s person, or on the floor, keep it till I come again,” he said; and then I knew he meant the ring, and was puzzled more than ever.

Should I tell him where it was. No; he would see it for himself, I decided, as he went out from the room and joined his father and the ladies at the door.

Alice’s gloves were ruined, and she stood holding my water-proof around her with the bare hand on which the gem was shining. But Godfrey did not see it until he helped her into the carriage, when the stone pressed hard against his hand, making him start as if he had been stung, or, rather, as if that 305ring on Alice’s finger had riveted anew the fetters he had been so glad to break. How came she by it, and what did it mean? Surely not that he was hers again. A thousand times no, when he remembered the mighty love for another surging through his veins and making him so wildly happy. He was honorably free. Alice had made him so herself, and even his father could not gainsay that or think the Schuyler reputation for honor compromised in the least. A man could not marry a woman who would not marry him, who had told him so with angry words and biting sarcasms. Godfrey was in high spirits, and his manner was not like that of one who has been so near to death. He could even joke with Robert and Emma, and would have rallied Alice on her forlorn and bedraggled appearance when she came to him on the shore, if he had not remembered the scene which had followed that coming, when the ring of betrothal was hurled at him so fiercely. How it flashed and shone upon her hand, which, it seemed to him, was continually thrust upon his sight, now on the table, now on the back of the chair, now on the mantel,—everywhere he turned his eyes there was the restless hand and the diamond sparkling on it, and seeming to say to him that his freedom was not so sure. At last, when he could bear the sight no longer, he sauntered away to his father’s present business-room, where he sat down alone to think of Gertie, and wonder if it would be greatly out of place for him to go and inquire for her that night instead of waiting till morning.

And while he sat thinking there was a knock upon the door, and Alice came in with a grieved look in her face and tears in her eyes, as she said:

“Have you nothing to say to me, Godfrey? You have scarcely spoken to me since the accident.”

“What shall I say to you, Allie?” Godfrey asked, not unkindly; and then Alice’s tears fell in torrents as she burst out, impetuously:

“Oh, Godfrey, say you do not mind what I said to you on the river-bank. I was angry, jealous, furious, because you put me away to save another, and kissed her before my eyes, and 306called her your darling. I think I must have been crazed to say what I did, and throw my engagement ring away. But I have it again. I took it from her hand and put it back on mine. See, it is here; look, Godfrey, and tell me it is just as it was with us.”

To say that Godfrey was unmoved by this appeal would be wrong, for though he had never loved Alice, he did not dislike her, and would gladly have spared her pain could he have done so without compromising himself again: but he could not; he must be frank with her now, and settle their relations to each other at once and forever, and he said to her: “But, Allie, it is not with us as it was, and it never can be again. I do not wish to hurt you unnecessarily, and I mean to be as gentle and kind as I’d want a great brute of a fellow to be with my sister under similar circumstances. Allie, I have never supposed that you imagined our engagement to be one of love. We liked each other, and were taught to think it was the proper thing for us to marry. I did not love you very much, and you did not love me——”

“But, Godfrey, I can now,” Alice sobbed; and Godfrey replied:

“Not as you will love some one else by and by; while I,—Allie, I believe I have loved Gertie Westbrooke since she was a child, but I did not know it until I was engaged to you, and met her here a woman. Then it came upon me, and for a time I was miserable. But I meant to keep my word to you, and should have done so if you had not yourself set me free. I do not ask if you knew what you were saying. I accept the fact, and cannot go back on it. It was not a manly act to thrust you aside in the water, but I did not know what I was doing, for Gertie was drowning and calling on me to save her, and I had no thought for anything else. I shall ask her to be my wife, and if she refuses, as she may, I shall bide my time and ask her again; have her I must; but, Allie, you and I will be friends always, just the same, and try to forget the past summer, which has not brought much happiness to either of us. I have been constantly fighting against my love for another, and you 307have been dissatisfied at not receiving from me all you had a right to expect. And it would grow worse, all the time, and it is better to end it now. If you like the ring, keep it, as you would a gift from your brother, and let me be a brother to you. I cannot be anything else. Will you, Allie?”

Never in her life had Alice Creighton prized Godfrey as she did then when she knew she was losing him, and her slight form shook with sobs, but she did not withdraw the hand he took in his, and when he said again: “Shall it be so, Allie! Shall we be friends?” she answered: “Yes, Godfrey,” and hurriedly left the room.

CHAPTER XLIV.
GODFREY AND GERTIE.

ertie’s plunge in the river was not followed by any serious consequences, and on the morning succeeding the accident, although she was very pale and languid, she complained of nothing but weakness and soreness from the rubbings we had given her, and she came to breakfast looking, like a little Quakeress in one of my sober wrappers, with only a plain linen collar around her neck, and her hair gathered into a net.

But nothing could make Gertie other than pretty, and when, just after breakfast, a step was heard on the walk, and I saw by the flush on her cheek that she knew whose step it was, I had never seen her more beautiful. Godfrey had come early, and was in the best of spirits, and so tender and loving toward Gertie that I watched him wonderingly, for I did not know what had passed between him and Alice, and could not guess how his heart was beating with joy at his freedom, and with hope for the future. He had brought her a bouquet of flowers and some grapes from the hot-house, and he hovered about her restlessly, and called her a little nun in that queer garb and mob cap, as he styled the net which he playfully pulled from her head, letting her hair fall over her shoulders, and about her face.

308“There, isn’t she just like some picture set in a golden frame?” he said, pushing back a stray tress from her forehead, and then stepping aside to let me see and admire, too.

How Gertie’s blue eyes drooped beneath his gaze, and how the hot blood colored her cheeks, until she looked like some guilty thing cowering from shame. And Gertie did feel guilty, and as if she were usurping another’s rights. She knew who it was that saved her from drowning, and she knew now that what she had thought might be a dream, must in part at least have been a reality; that amid the horrid blackness which was so much like death, Godfrey’s lips had kissed hers passionately, and Godfrey’s voice had called her his darling, and bade her come back to life again for the sake of the love he bore her. Yes, Godfrey had done all that, and he was doing it over again, so far as he dared, with me there in the way; and Gertie’s heart beat with joy, and then was heavy as lead when she remembered Alice Creighton, and her promise to Colonel Schuyler, which she must keep, if the heavens fell.

“I am coming to see you again after lunch, but meantime, I will send you some of your things, and I want you dressed in white, with these in your hair,” Godfrey said, taking from the bouquet a few forget-me-nots, which he laid in her lap. “I am going to tell you something which may astonish you, but will nevertheless make you glad, I hope, so au revoir, ma chère.”

He kissed her, and when she drew back in surprise, he wound his arm around my neck, and kissed me, saying:

“You see, I serve you both alike, the old maid and the young one. Adieu.”

He was off like the wind, and we could hear him going rapidly down the walk, his very step indicative of buoyant life, and vigor, and elasticity. I did not say anything to Gertie, but left her alone, while I attended to some household duties. When I returned to her after the lapse of an hour, I found her asleep on the lounge, with a troubled expression on her face and a tear on her eyelashes. The carriage from the hill was at the gate, Robert Macpherson and Emma were coming up to the door, and so I woke her and made her ready for them. Emma was 309paler than usual, but there was something in the expression of her face which made her prettier than I had ever seen her before. She was quite recovered, and she was in almost as good spirits as Godfrey had been, while Robert’s eyes followed her with an expression which set me to wondering if everything had been turned topsy-turvy by that accident in the river. I had a lily I wished to show Robert, who was something of a florist, and asked him into the garden.

“Yes, that’s a good old Ettie,—keep him as long as you can. I want to see Gertie alone,” Emma whispered to me, and as soon as we were gone she went up to Gertie and said:

“Guess now what has happened! Robert wants me to be his wife,—and I thought all the while it was Julia! He said so last night, and would have told me before but for the misfortune of his birth, which he thought I might not like. He says you know about it, and so I come to you first of all. Of course I’d rather his mother had been a lady born, and I do not quite like the thought of those Lyles and Nesbits. That’s the Schuyler and Rossiter of me, while the woman in me says: ‘I do not care; a man is a man for a’ that.’”

Gertie was surprised, for she too had supposed it was Julia whom Robert preferred, but she was very glad to find herself mistaken, and heartily echoed Emma’s sentiment, “A man’s a man for a’ that.”

“But what will your father say?” she asked, and Emma replied;

“I don’t know. I hope Glenthorpe will outweigh the Lyles. Robert will tell him to-night. There, he is coming, and I must go. Good-by, and come home as quick as you can. Tell Ettie, if you like.”

She kissed us both, as Godfrey had done, while Robert shook hands with Gertie, who said:

“I am so glad. I supposed all the while it was Julia, or I should not have thought it could make any difference. God bless you both.”

We did not expect Godfrey till after lunch, but he surprised us by coming in just as we were taking our seats at the dinner 310table. He was in town, he said, and thought it a waste of labor to go home and then back again, and so he came directly to our house, and helping himself to a chair, he drew up to the table beside Gertie, to whom he devoted himself with all the assiduity of an ardent and accepted lover. I think he looked upon himself in that light, and was not in the least prepared for the disappointment awaiting him.

At the foot of our garden, overlooking the river, is an old-fashioned summer-house, covered with a luxuriant grapevine, and Godfrey asked Gertie to go there with him as soon as dinner was over. His love was of the impetuous kind, which cannot wait to know the best or worst, and once alone with Gertie and free from observation, save as the bright-eyed robin, whose nest was among the vines, looked curiously down upon him, he burst out passionately and told her of the love which had been growing in his heart since the day he found her on the deck and stole the kiss from her lips.

“I have been so hungry for another,” he said, “and I had it, too, yesterday, when you lay by the water’s edge, and I feared you were dead. Forgive me, darling, if I took unfair advantage of your position. I could not help it, and had you died I would have claimed you as mine and told my love to all the world.”

“Oh, Godfrey, hush; you must not speak to me like this. Remember Alice,” Gertie said gaspingly, and Godfrey replied:

“I do remember her, and it is of her I must first tell you. When in my agony lest you were dead, I called you my darling and kissed your pallid lips, Alice stood beside me a witness to the love which never was hers. She was angry, as she naturally would be, and in her anger made me free from my engagement, and said she hated me and gave me back the ring of betrothal. After that she surely has no claim on me, and if she had I could not respect it now.”

Then very rapidly he went over with the entire story of his affaire du cœur with Alice from the time they both were children and the marriage was arranged by their parents.

“I like Alice as a friend,” he said; “but I never could have 311loved her as a wife, and shall not try. I have tasted a little the sweets of loving you, and nothing will satisfy me now but the full fruition of that love. Gertie, you do love me; tell me that you do, and not shrink away from me as you are trying to do.”

He wound his arm around her, and drew her closely to him, while with a shudder she cried:

“Oh, Godfrey, don’t ask me; take the words back, please, and do not torture me so cruelly. I cannot be your wife. I cannot. It must never be,—never. I have given my solemn promise, and I must keep it.”

Then he released her, and springing to his feet, exclaimed:

“Your promise, Gertie! Your promise! What do you mean? Has any other man dared talk to you of love? Has Tom Barton——”

She saw that he misunderstood her, and said to him:

“No, Godfrey, it is not that. I am not promised in that way, but for gratitude, for honor. Your father asked it of me.”

“My father? What do you mean?” Godfrey said, resuming his seat beside her, and growing very indignant and very white about the lips when Gertie told him what she meant, and that she would not break her vow.

Nothing he could say to her moved her in the least. She had promised and she should keep her word, and he must go back to Alice, who would forgive him.

“I shall never go back to her. We settled that last night,” he said, and then added, quickly: “Gertie, I am not one who gives up easily, and I shall not give you up. My father himself shall remove the bar; only tell me, Gertie, truly, do you love me, and if it were not for the promise, would you be my wife?”

Oh, what a depth of love and tenderness there was in the streaming eyes lifted to Godfrey’s face, as Gertie answered him so sadly:

“I am afraid I would.”

“Then you shall be,” Godfrey said. “I will see my father, this very night and tell him the whole story, and get him to remove the interdict, and when I have his consent I shall come 312straight here to you. Don’t go home to-day, Gertie. Stay with Ettie another night, and wait here for me till the moon is up, and then if I do not come you may know father has goaded me to such lengths that in my desperation I have thrown myself into the river!”

He spoke lightly, and tried to laugh, but there was a load on his heart, a feeling that the interview with his father might be a stormy one, but he was ready to encounter any difficulty for Gertie’s sake, and esteemed no trial too great if in the end it brought her to his arms. It was useless, he knew, to think of winning her so long as that promise to his father stood in the way, and so that was the barrier to be broken down; but in his passion and blindness he had little fear that he should fail. Gertie was the same as his, and he told her so, and stooped to kiss her lips at parting. But she drew back from him, and said:

“No, Godfrey, I am not your promised wife, and never shall be. Your father will not consent.”

She knew Colonel Schuyler better than Godfrey did, and her heart was very heavy, as she watched him going from her, his face beaming with hope as he looked back to say:

“Wait for me here, Gertie, when the moon comes over the hills.”

I saw that something had agitated her when she returned to the house, and laying her head on my shoulder, said, “Tell me about it if you like;” and then she told me all, and how hopeless it was for Godfrey to think his father would consent to his marriage with a poor girl like her. And though I felt that she spoke truly, I tried to encourage her, telling her that Godfrey was not one to stop at any obstacle which could be surmounted.

Later in the day Edith drove round in her phaeton to take Gertie home, but I begged to keep her another night, while Gertie, too, expressed a desire to stay, and so Edith went back without her, never suspecting the reason which Gertie had for staying with me that night.

313
CHAPTER XLV.
ROBERT MACPHERSON AND COL. SCHUYLER.

rom the moment Robert bore Emma in his arms to the shore, and kissed her, as he set her safe upon the land, he knew he stood committed, and that silence was no longer possible. And so he made his confession to her, and told her of his love, and asked if she would be his wife, and the mistress of Glenthorpe. Had he been poor, with no Glenthorpe, Emma might have hesitated, for in her way she was very proud, and good blood was her weakness; but Robert was not poor, and she was very much in love with him, and said she would be his if her father was willing, and she thought he would be, for he had never expected as much for her as he did for Julia, whose beauty ought to command a brilliant match.

Robert was not one to delay any duty long, especially if it were a disagreeable one, and while Godfrey was breathing words of passionate love into Gertie’s ear, he was closeted with Col. Schuyler and with Edith too. He had asked her to be present, from a feeling that he should find in her a powerful ally. But he had no conception of the real nature of her feelings when he told who he was, and said: “The man you buried in your yard, and who saved Godfrey’s life, was my own uncle, the brother of my mother.”

He stopped there a moment, waiting for the first shock to pass away, and Edith felt the iron fingers touch her throat slightly, while she was conscious of an impulse to grasp the young man’s hand and claim him for her own kindred. But such confession on her part must not be made now. It was too late for that, and she did not speak, but listened breathlessly while Robert confessed next his love for the colonel’s daughter, and asked if he might have her. Colonel Schuyler thought of Jennie Nesbit and that cottage in Alnwick, and all his family pride rose within him as he said, without a moment’s hesitancy:

314“I am surprised that after the fraud practised upon us so long, you should presume to ask for my daughter, especially when you consider the difference between our families. No, I cannot give her to you.”

This was the colonel’s reply, while Edith, who thought only of the sweet-faced, white-haired old lady knitting in the sunshine, and of the boy-lover coming to her through the twilight in the years agone, rose, and going to her husband’s side said to him:

“Yes, Howard, you will give her to him and forgive him for the foolish pride which has so long kept him silent with regard to his mother’s family.”

The colonel was disturbed, and answered a little impatiently: “It’s the family I object to, as well as the deception.”

“Yes, I know,” and Edith’s white fingers threaded his hair caressingly. “I can imagine that; but, Howard, consider the difference between Robert and those whom we saw in Alnwick, and remember there is a nobility from within which should level all outward distinctions. You chose me without money, family, or name, and Robert has all these. The Macphersons are among the first in Scotland, and you will not condemn him for the accident of his mother’s birth. You can afford to be generous. Let me go for Emma now, and see you make her happy by giving her to the man she loves.”

She had caressed him all the time, and her caresses did quite as much toward mollifying him as her arguments. She saw the wavering of his purpose in his eyes, and, as he did not forbid her, she went at once for Emma, whom she led into the room, and whose hand she placed in Robert’s, as she said:

“Now, husband, give them your blessing, and say that you are willing.”

“I cannot say I am willing,” the colonel answered, in a husky voice: “but we sometimes assent to what we do not like, and if Emma wants this young man, and thinks she can be happy with him away from all her family, I will not oppose her,—only let everything be done very quietly and unostentatiously. I could not endure a parade.”

315And thus he gave his consent, which hurt almost as much as it pleased, though Emma put her arms around his neck, and thanked him for having made her so happy; but Robert merely bowed his thanks, and, with a manner as lofty and haughty as that of any Schuyler, left the room. Emma soon joined him, and with her he forgot in part the little sting, and thought only of the future, when she would be his wife and the mistress of Glenthorpe, a place finer even than Schuyler Hill, with a long line of noble ancestry, and a coat-of arms to give importance to it.

CHAPTER XLVI.
GODFREY AND HIS FATHER.

he dinner at Schuyler Hill that day was a rather dull affair compared with what the dinners usually were; for Alice and Julia kept their rooms with the headache, while immediately after his interview with Robert, the colonel had gone up the river a few miles on some business, which he told Edith might detain him past the dinner hour, and if so, she was not to wait. As he did not return, they sat down without him, but only Godfrey was inclined to talk. He had heard Robert’s story from Robert himself, and had indorsed him heartily, and teasingly congratulated Emma for having done so much better than he ever thought she could do with her little ankles and milk-and-water face.

It was anything but milk-and-water now, and, with the blushes burning so constantly on her cheeks, and the new light in her eyes, she was very pretty to look at, as she sat at the dinner table, and Godfrey told her so, and said it was a pity she had not been engaged before, it was so great an improvement to her, and all the time he joked and laughed he was thinking of his father, and wondering when he would be home.

Six, seven, eight, and nine, and still he had not come, and the moon would be up at ten, and Gertie waiting for him, and Godfrey paced up and down the long piazza, restless as a caged lion, 316until the sound of horse’s feet was heard, and the colonel came galloping up to the side door, where Godfrey met him before he had time to dismount.

“Father,” he said, “I have waited for you more than three hours. I must speak with you at once. Come in here, please.”

And he led the way to the same room where Robert had declared his love for Emma, and where Gertie had given her promise not to listen to Godfrey without his father’s consent.

And Godfrey was there to ask that consent, and he plunged at once into the matter, and told his story so rapidly and emphatically that his father had no chance to utter a syllable, even had he wished to do so, but sat motionless and confounded while Godfrey poured out his burning words, and declaring his love for Gertie, asked that his father should remove the ban, and make Gertie free to be his wife. Godfrey could not have chosen a more inopportune time for the success of his suit. The colonel had borne a great deal that day. His pride had been sorely wounded in giving his daughter to a son of the Lyles, and now came Godfrey, telling him of his broken engagement with Alice, and asking his consent to a marriage with Gertie Westbrooke, a girl who, for aught he knew, was connected with a lower family even than the Lyles, and who at least had no money to bring him. This really was the sorest point with Colonel Schuyler. His business that afternoon had been with the agent of a firm which owed him a large sum of money, and which had declared its inability to pay, so that he had returned a poorer man by fifty thousand dollars than he had supposed himself to be. And this was from the portion he had set apart for Godfrey.

Just after the birth of little Arthur, the colonel had made his will, dividing his property about equally, as he thought, between his wife and children, and designating the bonds, or lands, or moneys each should have. Strangely enough, all the losses he had met with since had been from Godfrey’s share. For this, however, the colonel had consoled himself with the fact that Alice Creighton’s fortune would make amends for all, and now he was told that Alice was set aside, and his son 317would wed with poverty. He was confounded, and indignant, and angry, and said many bitter things, and utterly refused to release Gertie from her promise.

“Tell her from me,” he said, “that I will hold her to it as long as I live, and she must beware how she breaks her word, pledged so solemnly.”

And that was all the satisfaction Godfrey got. His father would not listen to his love for Gertie, and insisted upon his returning to his allegiance to Alice:

“Never, while I have my senses. I do not dislike Allie as a friend, but I shall never make her my wife. It is Gertie, or nobody,” Godfrey said.

And so the interview which had lasted a long time ended, and just as the clock was striking half-past ten a white-faced young man, with lips firmly compressed, and a look of determination in his eyes, went rapidly down the avenue, leaving behind a whiter-faced man, who had said to him:

“If Gertie breaks her word and marries you, remember it will be disinheritance.”

Now to one as madly in love as Godfrey, disinheritance did not seem so very dreadful. It was not half as bad as losing Gertie, and as he walked away from the Hill he thought how pleasant it would be to work for Gertie, and deny himself, if need be, that she might live in comfort. There was his cottage; disinheritance could not take that from him, for it was his own, and he had the deed. They could live there for awhile on almost nothing, and should get along somehow.

It was the same old story, always new, of young people with more love in their hearts than money in their purses. “They would get along somehow;” and Godfrey’s spirits were very light, and his cheery whistle sounded through the still night air as he drew near the summer-house, where Gertie was to wait for him.

318
CHAPTER XLVII.
WAITING.

ertie had been very restless the entire day, and when at last the sun went down, and there wanted but a few hours of the time when Godfrey was to return, her cheeks were burning with fever, and she was far more fit for bed than for the summer-house, where the fog from the river was making itself felt, and the night damp was falling. But I could not persuade her. Godfrey had said: “Wait for me here when the moon comes over the hills,” and she would do it if a hundred fevers had been burning in her veins. She had no hope, she said, that Colonel Schuyler would relent, and if he did not she must keep her vow, though her heart broke in doing it. Still I think there was a shadowy hope, which buoyed her up during the first half hour of waiting. She had expected him to be with her before the moon came over the hill, and when the first silvery light fell on the opposite shore, and the woods began to grow less dark and sombre, she grew restless and nervous, and complained of being cold, while the bright flush faded from her cheeks and lips, and left them pale as marble. The whole river now was flecked with patches of moonlight, and the summer-house, with the shrubbery around it, began to stand out in shadows, as the moon crept higher and higher up the eastern horizon. And still he did not come, and Gertie’s teeth were chattering and her hair was wet with dew, and I was about to insist upon her going in, when through the stillness a footstep sounded,—a rapid, elastic footstep,—and we heard next a merry whistle on the road not far away. Godfrey was coming; he had been successful, or he would never have come so blithely. So Gertie thought,—so I believed, and I stole away to the house, leaving the lovers alone in their interview, which lasted more than an hour, and at its close left the two young hearts which loved each other so fondly, sore and 319full of pain. For Gertie would not break her word so solemnly pledged.

“I love you so much,” she said, when he had exhausted every argument in his power to win her to his opinion, “and I would so gladly be poor with you, and work so hard for you if I could do it without sin; but I cannot; I promised I would not marry you without your father’s consent, and I must keep my word. But I did not promise not to love you, and I can do that and will, forever and ever. And now good-by. Don’t go to the house with me. Don’t kiss me,” she cried, as he made a motion to clasp her in his arms. “You must not do that; and, Godfrey, you say you shall leave Hampstead to-morrow. Don’t part from your father in anger. Don’t for my sake; and, Godfrey—” her voice shook a little here—“and-and—try to love Alice,—do,—and be happy with her,—and—never mind about me.”

She broke from him then, and came rapidly to the house where I received her, and removing the shawls, wet with the heavy dew, rubbed and chafed her cold hands and feet and got her to bed as soon as I could, while in my heart was a dire foreboding of what might follow this excitement and long exposure to the night air, in her already weakened condition. Nor were my forebodings groundless, and Godfrey did not leave home the following day as he meant to do. With his travelling bag and shawl he came past our house on his way to the train and stopped at the door a moment to ask for Gertie, but when I led him to her room where she lay burning with fever and talking of him and his father, and the little hot berth in the steamer where she had been so sick; he put his satchel and shawl in the corner, and drawing his chair near her bedside sat there all day long, while the doctor came in and out and said it was the result of exposure that day on the river, and that with ordinary care he apprehended no danger. Edith, too, came down with Emma, whom I hardly knew with the new happiness shining in her face and making her so sweet and gentle. Both were very anxious about Gertie, and the latter remained all night, and watched with Godfrey, by the sick girl, who paid no 320heed to either of them, but kept asking for Col. Schuyler. And the next day he came and stood by her, and taking her hot hands in his asked her what she wanted.

She seemed to know him, and replied:

“To tell you that I have not told a lie. I’ve kept my promise, though it broke my heart to do it, but I could not tell a lie even for the love I have for Godfrey.”

I do not know what he said to her, but he was very pale when he came from the sick-room, and he spoke pleasantly to Godfrey, and made no objections to his being there. But he did not come again or see his son, who stayed until Gertie was out of danger. Then he asked to see her for just one moment, but what occurred at the interview I cannot say. I only know that at its close Godfrey’s voice was husky and thick as he wrung my hand, and said:

“Farewell, Ettie; be good to her. I don’t know if I’ll ever come home again.”

Then he went away, and I found Gertie in a kind of faint, from which she did not recover until long after I heard the whistle of the train which took Godfrey to New York.

CHAPTER XLVIII.
GIVING IN MARRIAGE.

t was soon known in Hampstead, not who Robert Macpherson was, but that he was to marry Emma Schuyler, instead of the haughty Julia, to whom every one had given him. Julia was not a favorite in town, and when it was rumored that she was bitterly disappointed, and that the headache which had confined her to her room for several days was owing more to her disappointment than to cold taken in the river, I think the lower class rejoiced to know that even her proud heart could ache and her scornful eyes weep from humiliation. Of Alice’s grief nothing was known outside the house on the Hill, though many comments were made concerning Godfrey’s 321stay with Gertie when she was so sick, and his devotion to her was imputed to a feeling stronger than friendship for the beautiful girl so popular with everybody. But nobody dreamed of the broken engagement which the colonel tried to mend, bidding Alice wear the ring as if nothing had happened, and encouraging her to believe that all would yet be well between herself and Godfrey. The colonel had faith in Gertie and knew she would keep her word, and hoped and believed that what he had desired so long would ultimately come to pass.

Emma’s wedding was to be a very quiet morning affair at the church, with a breakfast afterward at the house, and then the married pair were to go at once to New York and embark the following day for England.

By mere accident Julia had heard something of Robert’s antecedents, and as she insisted upon knowing the whole, Emma had told her who Robert was, and the knowledge had gone far toward reconciling the proud girl to her loss.

Emma was welcome to a nephew of the Lyles, she said, with a haughty toss of her head, and when Tom Barton, who was still keeping sober for Gertie’s sake, was suggested to her as groomsman she did not object, and received him graciously when he came round to talk the matter over. Alice was to be the other bridesmaid, and it was confidently expected that Godfrey would stand with her. But this he refused to do, saying in his letter to his father that he should not be present at the ceremony. His coming home could only bring pain to himself and others, and he chose to remain in New York, where he should see Emma before she sailed and make it right with her. When Alice heard this she took the ring from her finger a second time, and inclosing it in a blank sheet of paper sent it back to Godfrey, with the feeling that all was really over between them, and that he never would be hers even if he did not marry Gertie. How she hated her rival, and how glad she was to know that she would not be present at the wedding.

“If she comes here I certainly shall leave, for the same roof cannot cover us both for a single hour,” she said.

But she had nothing to fear from Gertie, who was neither 322able nor desirous of attending the wedding. She saw both Robert and Emma frequently, and through the former was carrying out the plan she had formed when he first told her who he was, and gave her the cairngorms from his grandmother. Then she had thought: “If Julia marries Robert I will divide the stones with her, for no one can have a better right to them than Robert’s wife;” and now that it was Emma instead of Julia, she was far better satisfied, and sent a part of the stones to New York, where they were made into bracelets, earrings and pin as her present to the bride.

It is not my intention to linger long over that wedding, which came off on one bright morning in September, and at which no one was present save a few intimate friends. Julia, as bridesmaid, was very beautiful, we heard, and at the breakfast coquetted a good deal with Tom, who, after all was over, and the bridal pair gone, came and told us all about it, and said Alice nearly took his head off when he joked her about Godfrey’s absence.

“And if you believe me, she is kind of sweet on the rector,” he said; “and now that everything seems to be topsy-turvy and upside down, I would not be surprised if she became our rectoress some day. Wouldn’t she be a jolly one though, with all her cranks and furbelows.”

She had gone to New York with the bridal party, and Julia had gone, too, so that they were very lonely at Schuyler Hill, and within a day or two Edith came for Gertie to go home.

“Col. Schuyler wishes it; he misses you, I think, almost as much as I do,” Edith said, and that availed to take Gertie back more than anything else, I think.

It was the colonel himself who met her at the door, and led her into the house, and told her she was welcome home, and he was glad to see her. And he did seem happier for having her again, and as it was through him she had suffered so much, he tried by every means in his power to make amends, and withheld from her nothing save the one thing which alone could bring the color back to her face, and ease the heavy pain at her heart. Godfrey was studying very hard at his profession, and wrote occasionally to his father stiff, formal letters, pertaining wholly 323to his health or business, and not at all like the funny, rollicky epistles he had been wont to dash off when he was not as sad and spiritless as now. Once he wrote to Gertie, but she did not answer the letter, though she asked Edith to write and say she had received it, and that he must not write again. Those October days were very dreary ones to Gertie, and she was glad when at last there came a diversion to her thoughts, in the shape of a guest who appeared one day so suddenly and unexpectedly at Schuyler Hill, and of whom I will speak in another chapter.

CHAPTER XLIX.
MRS. DOCTOR BARRETT.

he guest was Mrs. Dr. Barrett, and she came one dreary day in November, unannounced and unexpected, her white puffs of hair just as smooth as ever, her mourning just as deep and her black eyes just as restless and eager as she walked up the avenue and looked curiously about her. She had accidentally stumbled upon Godfrey in New York while walking down Broadway, and recognizing him at once had seized him by the arm, and to his utter amazement, claimed him as her grandson by marriage. It was not in Godfrey’s nature to be other than polite to any woman, and so adroitly did Mrs. Barrett manage, that when at last he left her seated in the car which was to take her to Hampstead, he found himself out of pocket just ten dollars, which had gone for carriage hire, and lunch and stage fare, and ticket to Hampstead.

“But then a fellow must do something for his step-grandmother-in-law,” he said to Tom Barton, who chanced to be in the city, and to whom he related his experience, adding that he hardly thought the worthy woman was expected at Schuyler Hill.

Nor was she. But Mrs. Barrett was not one who cared particularly for the feelings of others. Regularly twice a year 324since her daughter’s marriage she had received money from Colonel Schuyler, and never in her life had she been more comfortable and free; but this did not satisfy her so long as she knew that across the sea was a luxurious home, which she felt she had a right to enjoy. It was more than six years now since her daughter’s marriage, and in all that time there had been no wish expressed to see her, no invitation for her to come, and she was tired of waiting and weary of her present idle life, while to do her justice there was in her heart a genuine desire to see her child’s face once more, and hear the sound of her voice. So, when her money came as usual in October, with a letter from Edith, who told of Emma’s marriage, and said that Julia was also gone, and she was alone with her husband, Arthur and Gertie, Mrs. Barrett’s decision was made, and giving up her pleasant rooms which she had occupied so long, she started for America, and arrived at Hampstead on a November day when the wind sighed drearily through the trees and rustled the dead leaves at her feet as she passed slowly up the avenue leading to Schuyler Hill. She had walked from the station, and taking the road which led past her old home, had paused a moment by the gate, looking at the pretty cottage and thinking of all that had happened since the day Abelard was carried through the gate up to the little cemetery she could see in the distance.

Edith was out that afternoon, and only Gertie was at home when Mrs. Barrett rang and asked first for Mrs. Schuyler and then for Miss Westbrooke.

“An old lady in black, with puffs of white hair,” the servant said to Gertie, who, without a thought as to who it could be, went down to meet the stranger.

“Oh, Mrs. Barrett,” she cried, when she caught sight of the well-remembered features. “I did not dream of seeing you. When did you come? Oh, I am so glad, and so will Mrs. Schuyler be. I wish she were here.”

There was no question as to Gertie’s joy, and Mrs. Barrett wished she was as sure of as hearty a welcome from her own daughter as she received from this stranger, who was removing her bonnet and shawl and talking to her so fast.

325“You must be very tired, and I’d take you to your room at once, only I hardly know which Mrs. Schuyler would wish you to have. The best, though, of course, as you are her mother. Yes, I think I’ll venture that. Come with me, please;” and Gertie led the way up the broad, long stairs to the guest chamber of the house, the one reserved for people like Mrs. Gen. Morton and Mrs. Gov. Strong, who sometimes visited at Schuyler Hill.

But Mrs. Barrett knew better than to take it. She was not so sure of Edith’s delight, while the colonel, she felt, would never forgive her if he found her in his best room. So she said to Gertie:

“I do not believe I had better take this, as I shall probably remain a long time, and a smaller, plainer chamber will do for me,—one near you, if I can have it,” she added, with an instinctive feeling that in Gertie she should find her strongest ally and friend.

“Come to my room, then, and wait. Mrs. Schuyler will soon be here,” Gertie said, and while she spoke, there was the sound of wheels, and looking through the blinds, Mrs. Barrett saw her daughter in her carriage coming up the avenue, and scanned her curiously.

“What a great lady she is, though,” she said, aloud, “and what a handsome house. I wonder if she blames me now?”

From having lived alone so much, Mrs. Barrett had acquired the habit of talking to herself, and she was startled when she met Gertie’s eyes fixed wonderingly upon her, and became aware that she was speaking her thoughts aloud.

“That’s she; that’s Edith; I hear her voice,” she said, beginning to tremble with excitement, and anticipation, and dread. “Would you mind telling her I’m here?” she added, feeling intuitively that if she was to have a shock Gertie would stand between her and the battery, and thus make it easier to bear.

“Certainly, I’ll tell her,” Gertie replied, while there began to dawn upon her a faint suspicion that possibly Mrs. Barrett might not be altogether welcome.

326Edith had never voluntarily mentioned her mother in Gertie’s hearing, and when the latter spoke of her, as she sometimes did, she turned the conversation at once into another channel. This Gertie now remembered, and when she added to it the few words Mrs. Barrett had inadvertently let fall about her daughter’s blaming her, she felt sure there was some misunderstanding between mother and daughter; and while she stood firmly by Edith, as the one probably least in fault, she felt a great pity for the tired, worn woman, whose face was so much paler and thinner than when she last saw it, and she resolved to do the best for her she could.

“Oh, Mrs. Schuyler,” she said, meeting the lady at the foot of the stairs, and detaining her there while she spoke. “Wait a moment, please, before you go up. I have some good news for you, real good, too. And you will be so glad. I was, and she is nothing to me either. Guess who has come?”

Edith could not guess, though a thrill ran through her nerves, and without the slightest reason for it she felt the touch of the iron fingers at her throat, and her voice was a whisper as she asked:

“Who is it, Gertie?”

“Your mother, and she is so tired and pale, and is trembling all over to see you,” Gertie replied, surer than ever, from the expression of Edith’s face, that there was something unpleasant between them.

“My mother! My mother here, in this house,” Edith said, and her voice, which she had recovered, reached to the upper hall where her mother stood, hearing the words and feeling them like so many stabs, for she knew now she was not welcome.

Edith was not glad, though her feelings were less for herself than for her husband. Try as she might she had never been able quite to forgive her mother for the false position in which her falsehood had placed her, and she felt she could never trust her again. Still she was her mother, and nothing could undo that, and she was there in her house, unasked, it is true, but as a mother, she had, perhaps, a right to come; or would have had, if the husband had not expressed himself so decidedly 327against it; and that was where Edith felt most keenly. What would Col. Schuyler say? Would he blame her? And would the result be estrangement and coldness between them? That something would come of it she was sure, and as if she already felt the shadow of the something which would result from that visit of her mother’s, and threaten both her life and reason, she stood a moment unable to move while Gertie stared at her amazed, and the mother still stood waiting in the hall above. Recovering herself at last she went slowly up the stairs, and on toward her own room, where she naturally expected to find her visitor. But Mrs. Barrett was at the other end of the hall, and called to her: “Here, Edith; here I am; here’s your poor old mother.”

Then Edith turned and went swiftly to the spot, and, touched by the trembling voice and the tired, white face, which had grown so old, forgot everything for a moment, and winding her arms around her mother’s neck, kissed her lovingly, and then leading her to her own room, shut the door and sat down to look at her.

“You didn’t expect me, I know,” Mrs. Barrett began, in a half defiant, half apologetic tone; “and perhaps I did wrong to come; but I was so tired of living alone, with nothing to do but think from one day to another; and then I wanted so much to see you, in the handsome home I got for you. A mother has a right to visit her child, you know.”

This she said because of the expression on Edith’s face, which she could not understand any more than she could realize that the refined, elegant woman clad in velvet and ermine was her daughter,—her own flesh and blood. Edith had grown far away from her mother, and there was scarcely a sentiment in common between them. Still she wished to do right, and when her mother said what she did, she replied:

“Yes, certainly, you have a right; and I am——”

She did not get any further, for the voice which made her start as it said:

“Edith, my dear, whose is all that remarkable-looking baggage down in the hall which I stumbled over just now?”

328Colonel Schuyler had ridden round to the stable, and giving his horse to the care of the groom, had entered the house through the side hall, where Mrs. Barrett’s numerous boxes and bundles had been deposited by the express man, who, as the lady was not in sight, made a little charge against the colonel for bringing it from the station. Mrs. Barrett believed in having things secure, and in addition to locks and hasps had tied her boxes with cords and ropes, which, with the marks of age and travel, gave them a “remarkable appearance” indeed, and the colonel stumbled over them and struck his ankle against the sharp corner of one of them, and he was suffering from the pain when he put the question to his wife, without a thought that the obnoxious baggage was part and parcel of his mother-in-law, who sat a little in the shadow, and whom he did not see till Edith said to him:

“Why, it must be mother’s baggage. I did not know it was here. Howard, see! here’s mother!—come all the way from England!”

Edith was as near hysterical as she well could be and not break down entirely, while the colonel was Confounded, and amazed, and indignant, altogether. When he knocked his ankle against the box and saw the bits of rope, he had thought of the Lyles, and wondered if it could be they were claiming relationship so soon; and now it was even worse than the Lyles,—it was a mother-in-law whom he did not like, and to whom he had sent larger sums of money every year for the sake of keeping her where he wished her to remain. But she was here in his house, and had evidently come to stay, and he must not be rude to her for Edith’s sake; so he made a great effort to be civil, and said:

“Ah, yes,—your mother! Mrs. Barrett, how do you do? I am,—yes, I am sure I am very much,—yes,—taken by surprise. When did you come? You must be very tired. Edith, my dear, hadn’t you better show her to her room?”

He had made his speech, and, anxious to be rid of her, asked Edith to take her away; and Edith, who breathed more freely now that the worst was over, arose, and bidding her mother follow 329her, conducted her to the small but pleasant room adjoining Gertie’s and communicating with it by means of a door. To Edith it seemed that her mother was safer near to Gertie, while Mrs. Barrett was delighted with the arrangement, especially as Gertie signified her willingness to have the door kept open when Mrs. Barrett liked.

It was known in the kitchen by this time that the soiled, jaded little woman with the queer-looking baggage was Mrs. Schuyler’s mother, and among the servants there was much talk and speculation concerning her. Had she come to stay? was she expected? was the colonel glad to see her? and what was she, anyway? Mrs. Tiffe knew all about the lodgers and the plain sewing, while the lower grade of servants knew a great deal more, and had among them a tradition that Mrs. Schuyler’s mother once sat under an umbrella in the streets of London, and sold gingerbread, and apples, and peanuts, and boot-lacings. And now she was here to be treated like Mrs. Schuyler herself, and John sniffed a little contemptuously when he went in to wait upon the family at dinner.

But there was nothing to sniff at in the highly respectable-looking woman, whom Gertie had helped to dress in her best black silk, with the widow’s cap set jauntily above the snow-white puffs of hair, and the air of quiet dignity which Mrs. Barrett knew so well how to assume, even when unusually embarrassed as she was now, with so much grandeur and display around her, and Edith mistress of it all. Truly, she did a good thing when she withheld the letter which would so surely have changed her daughter’s life, she thought, when she was alone in her room that night, and free to recall the chain of events which had resulted in her being there.

Edith, too, was thinking, and her thoughts kept her awake until long after midnight, when, as she was about falling away to sleep, she was startled by the sound of a groan, which seemed to come from her mother’s room, and a moment after Gertie knocked at her door, saying:

“Please, Mrs. Schuyler, I think Mrs. Barrett is very sick.”

In a moment Edith was out of bed and knotting the cord of 330her dressing-gown with trembling hands, while the colonel, also roused from his first deep sleep, and remembering Mrs. Rogers, who had gotten Edith up at midnight, wondered to himself “why these people would always persist in being sick at such inopportune times, and send for Edith to help them.”

The colonel was very sleepy and a little inclined to be unreasonable, and, after Edith had gone to her mother, he lay awake for a long time listening to the sound of voices in Mrs. Barrett’s room, the shutting of doors, the footsteps in the hall, and the general commotion, until he began to wonder if for Edith’s sake he ought not to get up and see what was the matter.

Ere long, however, he heard Mrs. Tiffe say to one of the maids, as she passed his door, that it was nothing but cramps and a good deal of hypo; and thus reassured he composed himself to sleep, and did not waken, when, in the gray of the early morning, Edith crept shivering to his side.

CHAPTER L.
THE STORM GATHERING.

t was more than the cramps and the hypo which ailed Mrs. Barrett, though at first it seemed much like both, and after seeing her fall away to sleep, Edith went to her own room without a thought of danger. But later in the morning, when she stood again by her mother’s bedside, and saw how pinched her features were, and how old and worn she looked without her teeth and puffs of hair, and how weak and helpless she seemed, she began to feel some alarm and sent for the physician at once. It was a severe cold, the doctor said, and there was no danger to be apprehended; but Mrs. Barrett thought differently. She had a settled conviction that the sickness coming on so fast was her last. She had only 331come to America to die, and Edith would not long be troubled with her, she said, in reproachful tones, which she meant should make her daughter sorry that she had not been more pleased to see her. And Edith was sorry, and made every possible amends by nursing her herself, and staying constantly with her.

And yet with all the care Mrs. Barrett grew worse, and every succeeding day found her weaker than the preceding one had left her. She did not seem to have any vitality or rallying force, and without any real disease sank so fast that within two weeks after her arrival in Hampstead, she came to the point where she looked death in the face and knew he was waiting for her.

There was no hope, and her only share in Edith’s grandeur would be a costly coffin and a great funeral, when many would look upon her face, never dreaming that they had seen it before. That was all, and she knew it now, and as earth began to fade away, and the realities of the next world loomed darkly in the distance, remorse came hand in hand with the shadow of death, and filled her heart with horror and anguish when she remembered the past and her sad, wasted life. It was no comfort to her now that the baptismal waters had once bedewed her head, and she been numbered outwardly with the children of God. To her there had never been any reality in religion. Everything was done for effect, and because it was respectable. For her there was no efficacy in Jesus’ blood, no heart yearnings after His presence, or tears because she could not feel Him with her. Even her praying had only been in public when it was the proper thing to do, for by herself she never prayed, never till now, when she stood face to face with death, and felt her burden of guilt and sin rolling over her like a mountain, and crushing her to the earth. Then conscience awoke, and like David she cried:

“My sin is ever before me.”

Oh, that one particular sin! How it haunted her day and night, seeming so much larger than all the rest, and making her shrink away from Edith’s presence and cover her head with the bed-clothes, so as not to see the face bending so kindly over 332her. For many long years she had slighted the Holy Spirit, and trampled on her conscience, until it would almost seem that the one was hard as a rock and the other flown forever. But God’s mercy is infinite, and He was giving her another chance, and leading her back to Himself through the thorny path her own deeds had made for her feet to walk in. At last when she could bear the anguish no longer, and must speak to some one, she said to Gertie, who was sitting with her that night:

“Gertie, are you a Christian? Do you ever pray?”

The question was very abrupt, and Gertie’s face flushed, and she waited a little before answering:

“Yes, I pray, and hope I am a Christian in the sense you mean. And you are a Christian, too?” she added, after a pause; and Mrs. Barrett said quickly:

“No, never. There was nothing real; all was for effect, and now it is like so many scorpions stinging me to madness, and one act hurts me worse than all the rest. Gertie, if you had done something very wicked years ago, something which nobody in the wide world knew besides you, but which concerned another very, very much, what would you do? you, who pray and hope you are a Christian?”

Ordinarily Gertie would have thought herself too young and inexperienced to offer advice to one so much her senior, and whom she had believed so good a woman, but now words seemed put into her mouth, and she answered unhesitatingly:

“I should ask God to forgive me; and if the person so much concerned was within my reach I should confess it to him, I think.”

There was a bitter cry, and Gertie saw great drops of sweat on Mrs. Barrett’s brow as she moaned:

“Yes, that is it,—only I must reverse it. Confess to her first, and then I can dare to pray, which I cannot now. Oh, Gertie, Gertie,—never, never tell a lie as long as you live.”

She was very much excited, and seemed at times to be out of her head, and talked queer things of the blue-eyed baby, “the child who she thinks is dead.”

333“Oh, where is it now, and what was its fate?” she kept whispering to herself, and once, as Gertie bent over her to bathe her head, she said, “Are you she,—the girl, the child, you know?”

“No, I am only Gertie; try to sleep and not talk any more to-night. You will be better in the morning and can tell Mrs. Schuyler,” Gertie said, feeling intuitively that Edith was the person concerned in the secret troubling the guilty woman so much.

She was sure of it when Mrs. Barrett answered:

“Yes, I must tell her. I must. Heaven give me strength to do it.”

Perhaps this was the first genuine prayer she had ever made, and as if already better for it she became more quiet and slept sweetly till the dawn of the morning, when Edith came to see how she had passed the night and relieve Gertie of her watch.

“Go to bed now, child,” she said, “and I will see that you are not called till lunch. You must be very tired.”

Gertie obeyed, and going to her own room, the adjoining one, was soon in a deep sleep, while Edith took her place by Mrs. Barrett’s bedside.

CHAPTER LI.
THE STORM BURSTS.

re you cold?” Edith asked, as she saw how her mother trembled, and taking one of the hands which lay outside the bed, she was going to chafe and rub it, when her mother snatched it away, and raising herself upright, cried out:

“Don’t touch me, Edith, till you have heard my story, then curse me if you will and let me die; but first open that square box there in the corner, and in my writing desk find the letter 334you wrote to him,—you know,—the letter which I kept,—you remember it.”

Edith remembered it well, and she trembled in every joint as she did her mother’s bidding, and brought the time-soiled letter, which seemed to burn the hand which held it, and to communicate to her a presentiment of the terrible shock awaiting her. That her mother’s story had something to do with her past life she was sure, but she never dreamed of the truth as she brought the letter and offered it to her mother.

“No, it’s for you; keep it, Edith. You will want it some time, perhaps, to prove that you at least meant fair. I have written a few lines on it myself to show your innocence,” Mrs. Barrett said, and Edith put the letter mechanically into the pocket of her dressing-gown, while her mother continued: “Edith, before I begin, promise me one thing,—not your forgiveness,—I do not expect that,—but promise to do what I ask when my story is finished.”

“How can I promise to do a thing unless I know it will be right?” Edith asked.

“It is right,” Mrs. Barrett said; “I’d do it myself, only I am old and sick and going to die, and I did not think about it in England as I do here on my death-bed. But you are young; you have health and money and time. You can look it up, and you will, Edith. You will when you know.”

She spoke in a whisper, and Edith shook from head to foot, as she, too, said in a whisper:

“Yes, mother, I will.”

She did not know what she was pledged to do. She only knew that the terror of something horrible was upon her, benumbing her faculties, chilling her blood, and forcing her heart into her throat, which the iron hand held so firmly. It was something about the child, her little girl,—something about the way it died; and her brown eyes were black in the intensity of her feelings as she fastened them upon her mother, who, cowering beneath that gaze, cried out:

“Look away, Edith; look somewhere else, and not at me, or I can never tell you.”

335But the eyes did not move, and shutting her own, the wretched woman began:

“You remember I took your letter and did not give it to him, but told him what I pleased. Have you ever told him the truth?”

Edith could not so much as articulate the one word no, and when, as she continued silent, her mother’s eyes unclosed and looked inquiringly at her, she only shook her head in token that she had not.

“Then you must do it now! There’s no other way. You’ll need his co-operation,” Mrs. Barrett said, and Edith’s eyes were like flaming coals of fire as they confronted her so steadily.

“Edith,” her mother went on, “do you remember the dreary room in Dorset Street, and the day it rained so hard?”

Did she remember it? Ask rather if she ever could forget it, when, even now, after the lapse of so many years, she never heard the sound of rain against the windows or saw it falling in the street, that she did not recall that dreadful day of fog and rain and darkness when her child was taken from her. But she could not speak, and her mother continued:

“I took the baby from you and carried her to the hospital, and then, when you insisted upon going after her, I went in your place, and when I came back I told you,—oh, Edith, don’t look at me, don’t curse me yet. I told you sh-she,—sh-she——”

“You told me she was dead. Was that a lie, too?”

Edith could speak now, though the effort to do so almost tore open her throat, where her heart seemed palpitating so wildly. Seizing her mother’s shoulder she shook it fiercely as she put the question:

“Was that a lie, too?”

“Yes, Edith, that was a lie, too!”

Mrs. Barrett’s voice was a whisper, but had the words been uttered in tones of thunder they could not have written themselves more distinctly on Edith’s mind than they did.

“That was a lie, too!” she repeated, rising to her feet, and 336seeming, to her horror-stricken, remorseful parent to grow tall and terrible in her excitement, as she clutched the shoulder more fiercely, and said: “That was a lie, too, was it? Mother, as you hope for heaven tell me the whole truth now. Baby was not dead then when you said she was?”

“No, Edith, not dead then——”

“Is she dead now?” and the hand pressed so hard upon the thin shoulder that Mrs. Barrett cringed with pain, but did not shake it off, and scarcely knew what was hurting her, as she replied:

“I don’t know, Edith.”

“You don’t know! Tell me what you do know, and tell me truly, too, as you will one day confess to heaven when you are questioned of the great wrong done to me.”

Edith was wonderful in her excitement, with her blazing eyes and livid face, and her mother gazed at her an instant fascinated and unable to reply; then, closing her eyes again, she said:

“I will tell you all I know. I went to the hospital and meant to bring her to you. I did, Edith,—believe me there. I meant to bring her to you, for I knew no other way. But when I inquired for the child Heloise left there at such a time, I was told that it had been taken by a woman whose name was Stover. The woman had given good references, they said, and was the mother of one of the nurses. She, too, lived in Dorset Street, not far from our old quarters. I’ve got the number,—there, on that letter you wrote to Colonel Schuyler,—and three or four months afterward I went there and inquired for the woman, but she was dead, and the people who occupied the floor above said her daughter had taken the baby and gone away with it in a handsome carriage, and that is all I know,—truly, Edith, all I know. I’ve never been able to trace her, though I tried once, just after you left me to come here. I missed Gertie so much, and wanted her so much that I began to think of looking for the grandchild, who would have been about her age, and I tried to find her, but could not. I don’t believe she is dead. I never have, and you, with money and influence, can track her sure, and you will; this is what you promised. I shall be dead, but 337shall rest easier in my grave if you find her. Edith, why don’t you speak, if it is only to curse me. Anything is better than this awful silence,” she implored, and then, as there came no answer, she opened her eyes and turned them toward her daughter, who stood over her as white and rigid as if frozen into stone.

Her hand had let go its grasp of her mother’s shoulder and hung listlessly down by her side, her eyes seemed fixed on vacancy, though in reality they were seeing that little blue-eyed baby up in some square room in Dorset Street, surrounded with wretchedness and poverty, while she, the mother, was rolling in wealth, with luxury and elegance everywhere. Truly it was a terrible picture to contemplate, but not so terrible as the second one presented to her mind, the picture of a young girl grown to womanhood, as that blue-eyed baby must be, and sunk, perhaps to the lowest depths of misery and possible shame, for who was there to teach her, to keep her feet from straying when the mother had abandoned her? It was this which affected Edith the most, and froze her almost to catalepsy during the moment she stood without the power to speak or stir, her head bent forward, her hands hanging down, her eyes fixed and glassy, and a white froth oozing from her lips, which moved at last, and said, slowly, painfully:

“May Heaven forgive you, mother, for I never can!”

Another moment and Edith fell heavily across the foot of the bed, while Mrs. Barrett’s loud shriek roused Gertie from sleep and brought her to the room.

“It’s a fit,—she is dying,—she is dead,” Mrs. Barrett murmured, pointing to Edith, who for hours lay in a stupor which seemed like death, and from which nothing had power to rouse her.

Gertie had summoned help at once, and the colonel was the first in the room, and held his fainting wife in his arms, and felt a mortal fear steal over him when he saw the deadly paleness and the foam about the lips, the purple rings beneath the eyes, and the head drooping so heavily on his shoulder. It was overtasking her strength, and sitting up so much with her mother, he thought, and the doctor thought so too, and when before the sunsetting they buried in the cemetery the little daughter 338whose eyes never opened in this world, and whom Edith never saw, they were sure it was over-exertion at a time when she needed all her strength, and the colonel’s affection for his mother-in-law was not perceptibly increased. She had offered no explanation whatever with regard to the fit, except that it came suddenly, when Edith was standing by her. Indeed she was nearly distracted herself, and Gertie, who watched by her, would not have been surprised to see her life go out at any moment.

For some reason there seemed to be a strong prejudice in the house against the woman. Nobody wanted to wait on her, nobody wanted to go near her, and so Gertie became her sole nurse, though she wished so much to be with Mrs. Schuyler, who was raving in the room across the hall, and whom it sometimes took two men to hold.

But Gertie’s duty was plain, and she stayed with the poor old woman, who clung to her like a child, talking strange things at times, and asking questions hard for Gertie to answer.

“Would God forgive her sin? Was there yet hope for her?”

This was the burden of her sorrow; and many times in the day, and during the night-watches she kept so tirelessly, Gertie knelt and prayed that every sin, however great, committed by the wretched woman, might be forgiven and washed away in Jesus’ blood.

“Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow,” she repeated often in the ears of the dying woman, who would reply:

“Yes, I know, I know, but some sin beyond hope, and I am one of these. All my life has been a lie, and I meant it should be. And now it is all thick darkness whichever way I look. I never did a genuine good thing in my life. All was for effect, except my love for you, Gertie; there was no motive for that. My love for you was real, and when you left me alone in England I tried once to pray, truly pray on my knees alone when nobody saw me; but something whispered, mockingly, ‘You pray?’ and I did not try again. Oh, what shall I do? What shall I do, the horror is so great?”

339“Jesus came to save sinners, even the chief of sinners, and He will do it; He said so, and He never told a lie,” Gertie whispered, softly.

And Mrs. Barrett caught the “chief of sinners” as if she had never heard it before, and held to it, and kept repeating to herself, “The chief of sinners; that’s I; He must have meant me, the very chiefest.”

Then she would ask Gertie to pray,—that the sin might be forgiven, and the girl kept from harm, and without knowing at all for whom she prayed or what particular sin, Gertie did pray many times, and did her best to soothe and comfort the remorseful woman, who grew more quiet at last, and exhibited less terror of death and the world beyond.

“I may yet be saved, but it will be as by fire,” she said to Gertie one day,—the seventh since the morning when Edith had been borne insensible from her room.

In her own agony of mind Mrs. Barrett had not evinced much interest in Edith’s illness, nor did she know how sick she was until, when more quiet herself, she asked for her daughter, and why she did not come to see her. Then Gertie told her of the fever which was raging so high, and with the tears pouring over her withered face, Mrs. Barrett said:

“I shall never see her again; but tell her, Gertie, how bitterly I repented, and how at the last peace came, even to me. Tell her, too,—and don’t forget this message, which will comfort her, perhaps,—tell her the last words she ever said to me must not make her unhappy. I deserved them. I do not blame her, and she need not remember them with regret, though she will forgive me some time. Heaven has, I hope.”

She was very quiet after that for the remainder of the day, and lay with her eyes shut; but several times, when Gertie looked at her to see if she was asleep, she saw her lips move, and knew that she was praying. That night was her last, for she died toward morning,—alone with Gertie, as she wished to be.

“Don’t call any one, please,” she said, when Gertie proposed going for Mrs. Tiffe. “I’d rather be alone with you, who have been so kind to me, and who, I am sure, like me a little.”

340“Yes,—I do, I do!” Gertie said, kissing the white face, on which the death-dew was standing.

And Mrs. Barrett continued:

“It is strange that you should be the one to care for me at the last, as tenderly as if you were my own grandchild. Have you a grandmother, Gertie?”

“Yes, or I had one once, though I never saw her; but Auntie Rogers said so, and told me all I ever knew of my family, which is very little. Sometimes I have strange ideas, as if I belonged to nobody, and then I try so hard to recall what it was I once overheard auntie saying to her sister in London years ago. Miss Anne Stover was at our house——”

“Stover! Stover!” Mrs. Barrett repeated, raising herself in bed and quivering in every nerve.

“Yes, she was auntie’s sister, you know; and said something about somebody’s being identified by a mark, and there’s a mark on my bosom, low down——”

“A mark of what?” Mrs. Barrett asked, eagerly.

And Gertie replied:

“It is like a drop of blood.”

“Blood! Did you say a drop of blood?” and Mrs. Barrett shook as with an ague chill as she fell back upon her pillow, while Gertie bent over her, and bathed her brow and lips until, rallying all her energies, she said: “Gertie, Gertie! tell Edith,—tell her! Oh, if I could live to see her myself! Gertie, my child, God bless you! I know He has forgiven me now!”

Her arms closed tightly around Gertie’s neck, and held her there in a close embrace until the girl herself unclasped them, and, putting them gently down upon the bed, saw that Mrs. Barrett was dead.

And just across the hall in her own room Edith lay, now singing snatches of some lullaby to an unseen child, which she hushed in her arms, now talking of the rain upon the window-pane, the tramp upon the stairs, the roar in the streets, and again laughing deliriously at something she said, and which seemed to strike her as ridiculous. And by her Colonel Schuyler sat, with the fear of death in his heart, when Gertie came in 341and told him there was really death in the next room, and asked if he had any orders to give.

“None,—no, do what you like,” he answered, quickly; then glancing at the white face on the pillow, and remembering that she who lay dead beneath his roof was his young wife’s mother, he rose and added: “I’ll go myself and see her;” and following Gertie, he soon stood by the motionless form of her who had been his mother-in-law, and whose presence in his house had annoyed him so much.

But she would trouble him no more. All he could do for her now was to give her a burial, and for Edith’s sake that burial should be as perfect in its appointments as if the dead had been his own mother, whom twenty carriages had followed out to Greenwood. There were almost as many as that drawn up before the house on Schuyler Hill on the day of the funeral, for far and near the people knew of the cloud hanging over that household; of the aged mother just arrived from England, and dead before she had even seen her daughter’s handsome home; of the little grave in the cemetery, made there too soon, and of the chamber where Edith lay, raving in mad delirium, and tearing her hair until they tied her hands to keep them from further mischief. And so they came from every quarter and filled the house to overflowing, save the south wing, where Edith was; that was bolted against them, and the murmur of the gathering multitude did not penetrate there enough to awaken the slightest interest in Edith. Only a very few beside myself were permitted to see the dead woman, lying so still in the costly casket which the colonel had ordered from New York, and to us, who looked upon her, there came no suspicion that we had ever seen that face before. It was very calm and peaceful in its last sleep, and many said, “She must have been fine-looking when in health,” while in every heart there was a profound pity for the stranger who had died so soon in a foreign land, and for whom there was no mourner at the grand funeral, except Gertie.

During the services the colonel left Edith long enough to come down to the parlor and listen while the prayers were said and the hymns were sung; then he went back to Edith, 342and strangers did the rest, making the funeral seem so sad and lonely without a blood relation except little Arthur, whose shoulder-knots and sash were black, and whom Gertie led by the hand when she went out to the Schuyler carriage, which was to take her to the grave as first and only mourner.

“Go with me, Miss Armstrong,” she whispered, as she passed me in the hall, and I followed after her until, as the carriage was reached, and she was about to enter, when I felt a sudden rush behind me, and was conscious that something unusual was agitating the crowd, and causing it to divide and fall back as if to give room for some one. It was for Godfrey, who, flushed and excited, made his way through the throng of people, and lifting Gertie from the ground as if she had been a feather’s weight, put her in the carriage before she knew whose arms were encircling her in so tender, masterful a manner as if they had the right. Little Arthur was put in next, and then Godfrey followed himself, closing the door behind him, and effectually shutting me out. But I knew it was better so, and was glad he was there, a help and a comfort to Gertie. By the merest accident he had heard that morning from Tom Barton of Mrs. Barrett’s death and Edith’s illness, and had taken the next train for Hampstead, which he reached just in time to join the funeral procession. Nor was his coming inopportune. He had a feeling, he said, that everything would devolve on Gertie, who would need somebody to sustain her. And she did, and when recovered from the first shock of finding Godfrey beside her, caring for her so kindly, she gave way, and her head drooped for a moment on his shoulder, as she sobbed out: “Oh, Godfrey, what made you come? I am so glad, so glad.”

“What for you tie, then, if you’se glad?” Arthur said, looking curiously from Gertie to Godfrey, and from Godfrey back to Gertie, as if not quite sure that all was right.

“Halloo, you little shaver, who thought you could put two and two together,” Godfrey said, as he took his brother in his lap and held him there until they reached the grave; then he alighted and stood with the child between himself and Gertie, while the burial service was read.

343“That’s my danmusser in the box,” Arthur said, aloud, as the coffin was lowered from sight, and when the bystanders heard it more than one wept for the lonely woman, the “danmusser” of the little three-years-old Arthur, whose golden curls were tossed by the November wind as he stood on tiptoe leaning forward to look into the grave and throw the wreath of everlastings he had brought for this purpose.

Arthur was greatly attached to his tall brother Godfrey, and hung about him constantly after the return from the grave, and told both Mrs. Tiffe and his father that “Dirtie had tied on Godfrey’s coat ’cause she was so glad danmusser was dead.”

Godfrey had intended to return that same night if possible, but when he spoke of it before Gertie it seemed to him that her eyes pleaded with him to stay, and when he stood for a moment as he did at Edith’s bedside and saw how sick she was, he felt that to leave was impossible until the balance was turned one way or the other, and he knew whether his fair young step-mother lived or died.

CHAPTER LII.
THE BATTLE BETWEEN LIFE AND DEATH.

rom the moment when Edith fell fainting across her mother’s feet, she had never known a moment’s consciousness, but had either lain like one from whom life had fled forever, or raved in wild delirium as she tossed from side to side, trying in vain to free herself from the strong arms which in mercy held her so fast. Her lost baby was her theme; but at first the colonel attached no meaning to it, thinking it but natural that her mind should dwell upon the little one dead before it was born. Still, it was strange, he thought, that she should rave about it so furiously, begging him to go and find it and rescue it from the streets, and bring it to her, so she could tell it she was not altogether to blame.

344“Oh, my daughter! my lost daughter!” she would moan; “where are you now, and where have you been these many years, when I thought you dead in your little grave?”

Then she would whisper to some fancied person standing by her bed, and ask him to forgive her for the wrong done to his child, and when the colonel said to her, gently, “Edith, darling, you have not harmed our child,” she would answer him:

“No,—not yours! Oh, you don’t know,—you would kill me if you did! Oh, my baby! my baby, who went in the rain!”

What she meant the colonel could not guess, and he grew old and worn as he watched beside her, listening to her ravings, and trying to find some cause for them. She never mentioned her mother, and did not know when she died; but she seemed quieter that day, and while the people were at the grave she suffered her husband, for the first time since her illness, to hold her hand in his; but her lips quivered and the tears rained down her cheeks as she kept whispering: “I am so sorry, Howard,—so sorry! and I did not know it, or I would have told you.”

“Sorry for what, darling? There’s nothing to be sorry for,” the colonel said, as he kissed her tears away and bade her try to sleep. She knew Godfrey, and as if feeling intuitively that she had a friend in him, she tried to tell him something about a child lost in the streets, whom he was to find and bring to her, “pure, spotless, unharmed.” She laid great stress on the last words, and Godfrey promised to do her bidding if she would go to sleep and not distress herself so much.

“I will, I will. See, I’m asleep!” she said, closing her eyes tightly, and lying so still that in a few moments she was asleep.

When she awoke Gertie was standing near, and at sight of her a bright smile broke over Edith’s face as she looked up at Godfrey, and said:

“You found her, didn’t you, pure and unspotted as an angel?”

Nobody knew at all what she meant, or spoke to her as she fondled Gertie’s face and hands, and asked her where she had 345been so long, and how it was she was so fair and sweet, so different from the girls in the street. Then for a moment consciousness struggled to assert itself, and she seemed to know who Gertie was, and whispered to her:

“Stay with me,—I’m better when I see you.”

Once before Gertie’s presence had called her back from the border land of death, and now she was so much quieter with her there that Gertie never left her except for the rest which she absolutely needed. In this condition of affairs Godfrey had no chance for seeing Gertie alone, except on one occasion, when he met her for a moment in a side hall, and stopping her as she was passing him, said to her:

“Gertie, have you not changed your mind? Must your answer to me be always the same?”

“Yes, Godfrey, always the same. Go back to Alice; try to love her. You will be happier so,” was Gertie’s reply, and Godfrey answered:

“Never, so long as I have my senses. I will wait for you a thousand years.”

He tried to kiss her hand, but she snatched it from him, and hurried away to the sick-room. The next day he returned to New York, and soon after, in a letter to her father, Julia spoke of her brother as having escorted Alice to a grand party given by the Montgomeries on Madison Avenue.

This piece of news the colonel managed to convey to Gertie, who felt a pain in her heart as she guessed what the end would probably be. Edith was better now. The fearful paroxysms had ceased, and she lay very quiet and still, seldom speaking to any one, but shuddering and manifesting actual distress when her husband came to her with words and acts of tenderness.

“Don’t, please; I can’t bear it,” she said to him once, when he brought a bouquet and laid it upon her pillow.

He thought the perfume offended her, and took the flowers away; then, sitting down beside her, told her how glad he was that she was better, and how desolate the house seemed without her.

For a moment she listened to him while every muscle in her 346face worked painfully; then, bursting into tears, she put up both her hands to hide her face, and cried:

“Don’t, Howard, you break my heart. Oh, Howard, my husband, pity me, but don’t make it harder with words of love. Go away, please, and do not come again till I send for you; then you will want to go.”

He felt hurt and wounded, but did as she bade him, and left her with Gertie; nor did he see her again for one whole week, except when she was asleep, and could not be disturbed by his presence. Then he would go in, and bending over her kiss her face softly, and smooth the golden brown hair, and calling her his poor darling leave behind some little token to show that he had been there.

At last Edith asked for her mother suddenly, and in a way which admitted of no prevarication, and Gertie told her everything, as carefully as possible.

“Colonel Schuyler bade us do whatever we thought you would like to have done, and he ordered the casket from New York, and was down stairs during the services,” Gertie said, and then Edith’s heart seemed bursting with a storm of sobs and piteous cries, which Gertie could not understand.

“Oh, my husband, my noble husband, what will he say? what will he say?” she murmured to herself, while Gertie stood looking at her.

At last she grew quiet, and turning to Gertie, said:

“Now tell me how mother died, and who was with her, and what she said.”

And Gertie told her what had passed in the chamber of death, of the terrible remorse for something which was evidently weighing on Mrs. Barrett’s mind, the bitter repentance, the peace which came at last, and the message left for Mrs. Schuyler.

“She was very particular about that,” Gertie said; “for she thought you might be unhappy, perhaps, if you did not know it, and she said you would forgive her some time.”

“I may, I’ll try. I hope I do, but it is very hard,” Edith replied, and then for an hour or more she lay with her eyes closed, 347though she was not asleep, and when at last she opened them she asked where her husband was, and expressed a wish to see him.

Gertie told her that as she was so much better and did not need him constantly, he had gone to New York for two or three days, she believed.

“His going was very sudden,” she said, “and I knew nothing of it till just before he went, when he came to me and said it was necessary, and if you asked for him I was to tell you he would be back soon. I should not be surprised if he came to-night.”

Instead of manifesting any disappointment Edith seemed relieved at her husband’s absence, as if it gave her a longer respite; but she little dreamed why he had gone, or of the fearful storm of anguish through which he had passed, and which left its marks upon him so plainly, that when at the close of the third day he came back, Gertie, who met him first in the hall, started in surprise, and asked what was the matter.

“Nothing, only tired; how is Mrs. Schuyler?” he said, and his voice sounded husky and unnatural, while it seemed to Gertie as if he stooped and tottered like an old man as he went slowly up the stairs, holding to the banisters and pausing once as if to rest.

He did not go straight to Edith’s room, but into his library, and Gertie took him some biscuits and a glass of wine, for she was frightened at his weakness and exhaustion. He thanked her for her thoughtfulness, and said, with a sickly kind of smile:

“I think I do need something. I have scarcely tasted food since I left home. How many days ago is that, Gertie?”

His manner was strange, and Gertie stayed with him and made him drink the wine, and eat a cracker, and then watched him curiously as he went down the hall to Edith’s room, which he entered and shut the door.

348
CHAPTER LIII.
COLONEL SCHUYLER AND THE SECRET.

e knew it now in part, and the knowledge of it had aged him as ten years of ordinary life could not have done, making him feel old and worn and bewildered, and uncertain whether it really were himself upon whom this blow had fallen. And it had come to him thus: Mrs. Barrett had brought her grandson a fanciful whistle, of which he was very fond, and which, since Edith’s illness, could not be found.

“I wants my fissle danmusser brought me,” Arthur said to his father, who was amusing him in the nursery one day, the fourth after Edith had banished him from her room and bidden him stay away until she sent for him.

“I wants my fissle,” the child kept saying, and then the search for it commenced again, and Mary, the nurse, suddenly remembered having seen it last on the day when her mistress was taken sick. “She had Arthur in her lap, and might have put it in her pocket. She sometimes did so,” she said.

“What dress did she have on?” the colonel asked, and on being told went himself to the closet where the cashmere wrapper was hanging. The missing toy was there, and also the letter, which he drew out with the whistle and held a moment in his hand, wondering what it contained, and why it had never reached him.

“Col. Howard Schuyler, Oakwood,” was the direction in Edith’s handwriting, and by that he knew that it was written years ago when he was in England, and his wonder increased as to the cause of its having been so long withheld and not destroyed.

Had Edith written it, intending to send it to him, and then changed her mind, and if so, why? he asked himself as he stood turning it over in his hand, and then there flashed upon him a remembrance of the time when she said he did not know all about that early love affair of hers, and he felt convinced that 349the all was contained in that soiled, yellow letter. And if so, should he read it? Ought he to read it? he questioned, as, having given the toy to Arthur, he went to his own private room to be alone and think. Never since Edith came to Hampstead had there been the slightest allusion to that affaire du cœur to which she had seemed to attach so much importance, and he had not the least idea who the young man was or where he had lived and died. Possibly it was all here in the letter, which he laid down and took up again three times before deciding to read it. And when at last he did open it and glanced at the heading, “Caledonia St., June 20th, 18—. Col. Howard Schuyler: Dear Sir,” he would not for a moment let his eye go any further, but held it fast on the “Dear Sir,” while he pondered again his right to read the letter. Then his eye wandered a little and caught a word here and there, and lighted at last on the names “Abelard Lyle” and “Rev. Mr. Calvert,” and then he began at the beginning and read every word twice, to be sure there was no mistake, while his heart seemed to stop beating, and he tore off both cravat and collar in order to breathe more freely. There was a humming in his ears, and he could not hear the December storm beating against the windows, and there was a mist before his eyes, so that he could not see the paper he held in his trembling hand. Nor was vision longer needful to him. He had read and re-read, and the lines had burned themselves into his brain word for word, and even with his eyes shut he could see the sentence, “Abelard Lyle, your hired workman, was my husband, and I was Heloise Fordham, who lived in the cottage by the bridge at Hampstead.”

“Abelard Lyle her husband!,” he tried to say, but his lips only gave a sound which made him shiver and wonder if he was dying, it was so unnatural, so like the cry of an animal wounded and in mortal agony.

And he was wounded, sorely, and every nerve quivered with pain, and he could feel the hot blood surging through his veins as he had felt it once when under the influence of ether. Then he had fought and struck at the dentist operating on him, and acted like a madman. But he did not do so 350now. He neither fought nor struck, but sat motionless, thinking of the words, “Abelard Lyle was my husband, and I was Heloise Fordham.”

He remembered that young girl, remembered the face framed in the green leaves, and the clear voice telling him Abelard’s name and place of birth. He remembered, too, that people had said the young man was her lover, and how suddenly she disappeared with her mother. And Edith, his Edith, the woman he loved so much, was that girl!—was Abelard’s wife, and the mother of his child, and had married him without telling him a word of the real truth as written in this letter! There had been a show of sincerity, and that was all. She had at first meant to tell him, but had changed her mind and given him no hint of the actual state of things. She had really come to him stained with falsehood and treachery and deceit, a lie on her lips, a lie in her heart, and a lie in every act of hers, since her beautiful head was first pillowed on his bosom.

Oh, what bitter things he thought against her in the first moments of surprise and anguish I How black the record was, and how he shrank from ever looking in her face again, as he thought of the imposition practised upon him.

“Oh, Edith! Edith! I loved you so much, and thought you so innocent and pure. I can never trust you again, or take you for my wife,” he said, when his lips could frame his thoughts into words, and his heart was hardening like adamant against the woman who had so deceived him, when the door was pushed cautiously open, and little Arthur came in, blowing his whistle vigorously at first, and then staring wonderingly at his father’s white, haggard face.

“What is it, papa?” he said. “Is you sick, too, like mamma?” and the mother looked through her boy’s eyes straight at the suffering husband, who recognized the look, and clasping his child and Edith’s in his arms, sobbed and wept over him just as he would have done had Edith really been dead and Arthur motherless. “Is you tyin’ for mamma? Don’t; she’ll det well. Dirtie and the doctor will ture her. Is you tyin’ for her?” Arthur 351said; and with sobs which rent his very heart, Colonel Schuyler answered:

“Yes, Arthur, I’m crying for her,—for her,—your mother. Oh, Edith! my lost Edith!”

His tears poured in torrents now, and did him good, for the pressure around his heart gave way, the blood flowed more slowly through his veins, and the humming ceased in his ears, as he strained Arthur to his bosom and covered him with the kisses he meant as a farewell to the mother. He could never touch her false lips again, but he could kiss her child, and he fondled and wept over him, and then bidding him go away, and locking the door upon him, went back to the battle he was fighting between justice and inclination.

What should he do? What ought he to do? Should he show the letter to Edith, and, upbraiding her with her duplicity, live henceforth apart from her, as one he never could trust again? or should he keep his knowledge to himself, and try to act as if nothing had happened, hoping that some time she would herself tell him the truth, and why it had so long been withheld?

He could not decide then; he was in no condition to think clearly of anything, except that his Edith, whom he had taken for a pure, innocent young maiden, had been a wife and mother, and never let him know it. What her motives had been he could readily guess. She wanted his money and name, and the position he could give her, and if she told him all she feared the result. This was the reason, he said, and yet when he remembered many things in the past, he could not reconcile the two, or reason clearly about anything.

“I must go away by myself and think it out alone,” he thought, and glancing at his watch, and seeing there was yet time for the down train to New York, he rose, and going to the door of Edith’s room, knocked softly, and asked Gertie to come out a moment to him.

“I am going away for a day or two, or three at the most,” he said. “Mrs. Schuyler is out of danger, and as in her present state she is more quiet without me, I shall not be needed for a 352little time, and leave her in your care. I know I can trust you in everything. You have been faithful to us, Gertie!”

He wrung her hand as he said this, feeling for the moment as if of all his family Gertie alone had not forsaken him. Emily was dead, Emma was over the sea, Godfrey was estranged, Julia was seeking her own pleasure with a party of friends in Florida, and Edith, oh, how far she had drifted away from him within the last two hours,—so far that he feared she could never come back again, just as she was before. And yet he loved her so much, and when he caught through the open door a glimpse of her white face upon the pillow, he experienced a keen throb of pain, and felt an almost irresistible desire to go to her and beg her to tell him that what he had just read was false, that she was nought to Abelard Lyle, nought to that woman in Alnwick, the very thought of whom made him shudder with disgust. But there could be no doubt. He had it in her handwriting, and with a stifled moan he walked through the hall, and down the stairs out into the yard, where he ordered his man to take him to the train.

There were none of his acquaintances going down at that time of the day, and choosing a seat near the door behind his fellow-passengers, he sat with his coat-collar turned up, and his hat over his eyes, apparently asleep, though never was sleep further from one’s eyes than from his, as he mentally went over with the story fold in Edith’s letter and tried to realize it. Arrived in New York he went to the St. Nicholas, feeling that he should be more secure there, as Godfrey and his friends frequented the hotels farther up town. He wanted as private a room as possible, he said, with his meals served in it, and no one to intrude; so they gave him one far up on the fourth floor, and there for three days he stayed, never once leaving the hotel, or taking other exercise than to walk up and down his room, and this he did for hours at a time, with his hands behind him, and his head bent forward, while he tried “to think it out.” He did not sleep, and the chamber-maid found his bed unruffled morning after morning, when she came to arrange his room, and his food was taken away untouched unless it were 353a bit of toast and a cup of coffee, which he compelled himself to swallow on the morning of the third day, when he felt his strength giving way, and knew he must take something. He had thought it all over and over again, and gone through with every incident of Edith’s life as narrated in her letter, and was as far from any decision as ever.

“If she had told me,—if I had known,” he kept repeating to himself, without finishing the sentence, for he did not know what the result might have been if he had known that the woman he thought to make his wife was the widow of his hired workman, the sister-in-law of Jenny Nesbit, among the Alnwick Hills. “If I had loved her then as I do now, it would have made no difference,” he said to himself at last, “and in any event I should have respected her for a truthful, conscientious woman, which I cannot do now. Oh, Edith, Edith, how you have fallen, and I thought you so true!”

This was the third day when he sat exhausted by the table where the letter lay. He kept it there constantly in his sight, though he had not read it since he came, but he took it up now and turning to the first page began to read it again, when, on the margin in the lower corner his eve caught, for the first time, a few faint pencil marks, almost erased, but which could still be made out with care. It was not Edith’s handwriting, and in looking closely he recognized the peculiar style of Mrs. Barrett, whose writing he had seen on the back of Edith’s letters received from her. What had she written there,—she who, at her daughter’s instigation, had lied so foully to him on the day when she came with that smooth story of an early love and nothing more! He asked himself this question, and as he asked it, there flashed over him a light of revelation even before he made out the pencil lines.

London, October 10th, 18—.
“This letter Edith bade me carry to Col. Schuyler, but I kept it back and told him what I liked, and she never knew of the deception until just after she was married, when I accidentally let it out, and she fainted away.

“M. Barrett.”
354The words were finely written, but the colonel made them out, while the sudden revulsion from despair to joy was almost too much for him, and he sat for a moment half fainting in his chair. Then he roused himself, and his first words were:

“Thank God! I have my Edith back again!”

It must have been in some moment of contrition that Mrs. Barrett had penned the words with which from her grave she now spoke for her injured daughter. Something, sure, had prompted her to keep the letter and write the explanation which brought such joy to Col. Schuyler. The losing faith in Edith’s integrity, the belief that she was artful, intriguing, and deceitful, had hurt him a thousandfold more than the humiliation of having married the widow of Abelard Lyle. He had hardly given that a serious thought, so great was his disappointment at having found Edith false as he believed; and when she was proved otherwise his joy was as acute as his grief had been intense. Every circumstance which bore at all upon the matter came back to him, and he remembered so distinctly the many times since their marriage when Edith had tried to tell him. At the inn where they stopped on their bridal night she had stolen to his side, with the confession on her lips, and he had not listened to her, but had bidden her never allude to the past again, as he was satisfied. Dear Edith, he said, aloud, and felt again the pressure of her hand on his shoulder where she had lain it, and heard the falter in her voice as she first called him Howard. How she must have suffered then and afterward when he insisted upon taking her with him to the Lyles. He knew now the secret of her silence, which he had called pride. The iron fingers were on her throat, and she could not talk in Abelard’s home with that dreadful Jenny sitting there. And she was Edith’s sister-in-law! The colonel shivered from head to foot when he remembered that, and a flush of shame and mortification spread over his pale face. He had yet to fight these feelings down, and he did it manfully, and said to himself again and again:

“I love her just as wall, now that I know she did not mean to deceive me, just as well as if she had never seen those Lyles, 355who seem thrust upon me at every point, first through Emma and then through Edith, my wife.”

He liked to say “my wife,” and kept repeating the name as if it would make her dearer to him, and wipe out every feeling of regret for the incidents of her early life. How she has suffered, he thought, as he remembered all she must have passed through after her arrival at Hampstead, and he could understand now the meaning of her strange words when their first baby was born, and when it died. She was thinking of the little girl whose grave she never saw, and in the transports of his joy and generosity the poor man thought how he would, if she wished it, help her find that grave, and place a headstone there to the memory of little Heloise Lyle! Nobody would ever connect that name with him or his, and he was glad of that, and was not sorry that the little girl was dead, and could not by any chance come up as a witness against his Edith. Alas, he never dreamed that only half the strange story had been told, that his love and generosity, and principle of right and wrong were to be more severely tested than they yet had been. He was human, and naturally it was a comfort to him to think that Edith’s story need be known only to her and to himself. It should be their secret, and die with them when they died, and the world never be the wiser for it.

That the secret had something to do with Edith’s recent dangerous illness, he was certain, when he recalled expressions and ravings which had puzzled him so much; and he knew, too, or thought he did, why she shrank from him as she always did when delirious, telling him she was unworthy to let him touch her. But this should be so no longer; he would go home to her at once, and as soon as she could bear it, tell her that he knew the whole, and loved her the same as ever.

He did not stop long after that, but calling for his bill, hurried to the station and was soon on his way to Schuyler Hill.

356
CHAPTER LIV.
HUSBAND AND WIFE.

e found his wife asleep, with her cheek resting on one hand, her hair pushed back and lying in masses upon the pillow. He had seen her thus many times, and he paused to look at her now, and thought how fair and lovely she was even yet, with her thirty-four years and the marks of her dangerous illness. Hers was a face which does not grow old, and to him it seemed more beautiful than it had been on her bridal day, because he loved her more than he did then, and knew how sweet she was. He did not associate her in the least with Abelard Lyle when he was with her. It was some other Edith who had been the heroine of that strange romance,—it was Heloise Fordham, the girl at the cottage, who had shed such bitter tears for the young carpenter, and not his wife, lying there before him in that quiet sleep. She was Edith,—the mother of his little boy, and he stooped at last and kissed her just as tenderly as if that letter had never been read by him, and he had never heard of the Lyles who lived in Alnwick.

The kiss roused her a little, and turning upon her pillow, her lips moved, and he heard her say, “Abelard,” while a pang, keener, sharper, and different from anything he had known, shot through his heart and brought great drops of sweat to his brow and lips.

During the dreadful three days when he was “thinking it out” he had experienced no jealousy of the dead youth, or for an instant believed that Edith loved him still, or could have loved him had he lived till now and met her for the first time in the fulness of her womanhood. But she was dreaming of him sure, and Colonel Schuyler would have given much to know the nature of the dream.

She was sleeping again, and he drew a chair beside her, and with his eyes fastened upon her face, sat looking at her until he heard Gertie light the gas in the adjoining room, preparatory to 357putting Arthur to bed. This was something the child would allow no one else to do, and now, when this was done, he insisted upon “tissin’ mamma just once” before going to his crib.

“Yes, Gertie, let him come,” the colonel said, as he heard the clamor at the door, and in his long night-gown the boy came in, screaming with joy at sight of his father, and crying out, as he reached out his arms to touch his mother’s face:

“Oh, mamma! mamma! papa’s tome! I’se so glad!—is you?”

Edith was awake now, and started when she saw the dark figure and guessed whose it was.

“Papa’s tome!” Arthur said again, while Gertie, feeling sure that Mrs. Schuyler would be disturbed, carried him forcibly away, and left the husband and wife alone.

Then Colonel Schuyler arose, and bending over his wife, said softly:

“Edith, darling, I have come home. Are you glad to see me?” He did not wait for her to answer, but continued: “They tell me you are better, and I am so rejoiced. Kiss me, can you?”

She kissed him as he desired, and he felt her hot tears on his cheek as he held his face to her. She was much better than when he left her. Reason had come back again, and she could think of all that was past, and what lay before her, and she shrank from it, and from her husband, who must soon know everything, and who might turn from her in bitter scorn and disgust. Oh, how she loved him now! and how her poor heart ached when she thought of losing his respect and seeing his love for her turning into hatred. For he did love her; she was sure of that, and never had his manner been so full of manly tenderness as it was when he came to her after an absence of three days and asked her if she was glad. It seemed almost, she thought, as if he were pitying her, and he was, and wishing he could help her tell him what he was certain she wanted to. But it must not be that night; she was too weak to bear the excitement. He must wait till she was stronger, he thought, and when at last, as 358he supported her in his arms and stroked her face caressingly, she said to him:

“Now, Howard, please lay me down, and do not come again till I send for you;” he went away, but did not stay till she sent for him, lest it should be too long. Every day he went to see her, and tried to seem natural, and once, when she asked why he looked so thin and haggard, he answered evasively and said he had a cold, and then went straight to the cemetery, and, standing at Abelard’s grave, read the inscription aloud:

“James A. Lyle. Born in Alnwick, England. Died June 18th, 18—. Aged 23.”

Then he examined the stone and tried if it were firm in its place, and kicked the snow and dead leaves from a tuft of daisies, which looked so fresh and green that he stooped to examine it, and found to his surprise a tiny white blossom hidden under the snow and the pile of leaves and straw which Gertie had put there in the fall to protect the plants.

“Daisies under the snow on his grave. It is very remarkable,” he said, as he picked the little flower, and going back to the house he put it in some water, and set it on the table in his room, where he watched it all day long until it grew to be almost a phantom and he felt he could endure it no longer.

He must speak to Edith or go mad himself. She was much better now, and he would watch with her that night, and have it out when there was no fear of interruption. But he did not tell her of his intention lest she should oppose it, and she supposed her attendant was to be Gertie, who frequently slept in the room with her.

Edith’s habit was to sleep from nine to twelve, but this night it was nearly one when she awoke and looked about her. The gas was turned down and the bright winter moonlight came through the window and fell in a sheet upon the floor, making the room almost as light as day, and showing plainly the figure sitting so motionless in the chair at the foot of the bed. It was not Gertie, and Edith’s heart beat quickly when she saw it was her husband, and thought:

“I must tell him,—I am able to bear it now.”

359He knew she was awake, but waited for her to speak, trembling in every joint as he wondered how he should begin to say that which he was there to say, and wondering, too, how she would receive it. He had the little daisy on the table near him, and when she stirred he took it in his hand and fancied that it had grown to be the size of the magnolia blossoms he saw once in the gardens at the South. His mind was surely getting disordered, when Edith spoke and said:

“Howard, is that you? Are you watching with me?”

“Yes, Edith;” and he drew his chair closer to her, while she went on:

“Howard, do you love me, really, truly love me?”

“Yes,” he answered, “I really, truly love you. Why do you ask me, Edith?”

“Because, Howard, because I,—I,—wanted to be sure. I’ve,—there is something I must; oh, Howard, you do,—love me,—you do.”

It was a piteous cry, and had she been convicted of murder Colonel Schuyler would have stood by her with that sound in his ears. She was going to tell him, instead of his telling her! He was sure of it, and in his anxiety to know how she would begin, he resolved not to help her at first, but hear what she had to say. For a moment she lay very still, with her hands locked tightly together, and he knew that she was praying, for he caught the words “Help me,” as they came from her white lips. And heaven did help her, and the iron fingers were held back and her respiration was unimpeded, save by strong emotion when she at last began:

“Howard, do you remember the day when we were married, and I fainted in my dressing-room before going to the train?”

It was coming now, sure, and he replied:

“Yes, Edith, I remember it; your mother said it was in some way connected with that affaire du cœur.”

“Yes, Howard, it was. Hold my hand, please, and hold it tight; till you feel your love for me going away.”

He took her hand and held it fast, while she continued:

“And do you remember the little inn, and the pleasant night, 360and the perfume of the flowers in the yard and the fresh hay on the lawn, and you sitting on the balcony when I came to tell you something, which you refused to hear?”

“Yes, Edith, I remember it. Does one forget his wedding day so easily that I should forget that,” he said; and Edith went on:

“You asked me to call you Howard, and I said, wait till I have told you what might make a difference, but you would not listen. You were satisfied, you said, and if there was anything more you did not wish to hear it, and you promised that whatever came in the future you would have faith in me and believe I meant to do right. Howard, there was something more, a terrible something, and I must tell it to you now, but draw the curtain, please; shut out the moonlight and turn off the gas. I’d rather be in the dark, and not see your face, when your love begins to turn to hate.”

It would be cruel to let her go further. He had heard enough to satisfy him that a full confession was to be made, and without dropping the curtain or turning the gas lower he leaned over her, and said:

“One question, Edith, please; do you love me now better than you did on our wedding day? Is there no regret in your heart for that early lover? Tell me truly, Edith.”

“No, not the way you mean. Regret there is, it is true, but not that way. The love I had for him has been overshadowed by a later and mightier love; and, I can truly say, few wives have ever loved their husbands as I love you, and that makes it so hard to tell you now when I want your love so much. Oh, Howard, just once, for the sake of all the happiness we have had together, kiss me and hold me in your arms as you used to do. You’ll never hold me so again, but this once do not refuse.”

He wound his arms around her and pressed her closely to him, and kissed her brow and lips, and she felt his tears upon her face when at last he released her and put her gently back upon the pillow.

“Thank you, Howard. I’ll never ask you again,” she said, 361for she believed it their farewell; but he knew it was not, and when she was recovered a little he summoned all his energies, and said:

“Edith, you seem to be afraid that what you have to tell me will make me love you less. I promise you that it shall not, and in token of that promise I have brought you this daisy which I found blossoming under the snow on Abelard’s grave, as if it were a message from him to mediate between us.”

He spoke slowly and held up the little white blossom before the eyes which looked at it and him so wonderingly.

“What do you mean?” Edith asked, faintly, and he replied:

“I mean that you have no need to tell the story, for I know it all!”

There was a sudden gasping for breath, a throwing back of the bed-clothes as if their weight oppressed her, and then Edith asked:

“What do you know?”

“I know that you were once Heloise Fordham, and lived in the cottage by the bridge, and were the wife of Abelard Lyle, and had a little daughter born in London, whom your mother carried away when you were insensible, and that you wrote all this in a letter to me before we were married, and supposed I got that letter until our wedding day, when you learned how we had both been deceived, and you tried so hard to tell me. You see I do know it all,” he continued. “I accidentally found your letter in the pocket where you put it with Arthur’s whistle. It was directed to me and I read it, and in my first surprise and bewilderment went away to be alone and think it out. I did think it out, and exonerated you entirely, and have come back to tell you so and assure you of my continued love and respect. Poor darling, how much you must have suffered, but it is all over now. Your secret is known to me, and that is all that is necessary. It shall die——”

He stopped short, struck by the look of pain and anguish on Edith’s face, and the low moan which escaped her as she drew herself away from him to the far side of the bed. He did not 362know then that her child still lived; he could not, for it was not thus written in her letter, and throwing up her hands, she cried:

“Oh, Howard, Howard, you do not know the whole, neither did I till mother came and told me. She went to the hospital after baby, as I said in my letter, and when she came back she told me baby was dead, and I believed her, nor ever had another thought until the night I was with her and you found me fainting at her feet. She could not die with that lie on her soul, and she told me the truth at last. Baby was not dead. She was adopted,—taken by some poor woman who lived in Dorset Street,—the number is in that letter or on the envelope somewhere, and the name Stover. Howard, my daughter is alive, and now you know the whole.”

He did not speak, though he shivered from head to foot as there came over him a dim foreshadowing of what Edith meant to do and what he must not prevent her doing. He saw the right as clearly as she did, and knew that were he in her place he should do the same; but the flesh was very weak, and he staggered, and grew faint and sick as he thought of letting the whole world know who his Edith was, and how he had been deceived. If the child was found and acknowledged all this must be, unless indeed they both might think it best to keep it still a secret. They could care for the girl just the same, adopt her, perhaps, and never let her nor any one know just what she was to them. Edith certainly would concede so much to his feelings. She would not thrust this great humiliation upon him in the face of all the world. And if they never found the girl,—but he dared not allow himself to consider that possibility for a moment. Something told him they would find her, and he caught himself wondering how she looked, if she was at all like her mother; or had she lived so long with the people in Dorset Street that every vestige of grace and beauty and refinement had been destroyed, and she was like her aunt, Jenny Nesbit, in far-off Alnwick, with her bare arms and dreadful slang. How he dreaded her, and how his heart beat with shame at the thought of bringing her there as an associate for his wife and 363Gertie! Oh, if she could prove to be like Gertie, he thought; but she would not, and never in all his life had he shrunk from a living thing as he shrunk from that unknown step-daughter of whose existence he had never dreamed until within the last few minutes.

“Howard!” Edith said at last, but he did not answer. “Howard,” she said again, “now that you know the whole you will love me still?”

“Yes, Edith,” he said; and she continued, “And you will help me find her just as soon as I am able to cross the sea. Will it be in a week, do you think, or two? I am a great deal better than I was yesterday, and now that you know it I shall get well so fast. Do you think we can start in a week?”

“No, Edith, I know you cannot. A sea voyage in the winter is always rough, and you could not bear it yet,” was his reply, and Edith assented, and thought how hard she would try to get well so as to go on that strange errand of hunting up a child lost almost nineteen years.

Anon there crept into her mind a suspicion of what it would be to her husband to have the story known, and she said to him pityingly:

“Howard, I am sorry for you. It will be so hard for you to have the people know.”

“Yes, Edith, very hard at first; but you surely need not say anything until you know whether you find her,” the colonel replied, and Edith acquiesced, and longed for the time when she should be able to endure the excitement and fatigue of the voyage and the search, and the finding-perhaps of the object sought.

She was very tired and did not talk any more that night, but fell into a quiet sleep, while her husband sat by her, feeling as if he would never sleep again, or know a moment’s gladness. How old and tired and worn he looked the next day, and how he stooped in walking, as if the burden were greater than he could bear. Sometimes he thought it was, and once the tempter whispered that the cold river just in sight from his window would be a better place than his beautiful home after all was 364known. But Col. Schuyler was too brave a man to die a suicidal death in order to escape a trouble. “Better live and face it,” he thought, and then began to feel a restless impatience to have the matter settled, to know the worst as soon as possible, and he was almost as glad as Edith when she was pronounced able to undertake the voyage. Why they were going to England in the winter they did not say, and we naturally supposed it might be to benefit Edith and pay a visit to Glenthorpe, where Emma was so happy. Norah was not going; Edith could get a maid across the water, she said, and she preferred leaving Norah to look after little Arthur. To Gertie, however, the principal care of the child was given, and she promised to be faithful to her trust, and care for the little boy as if he were her brother.

And so one day in January, when the Oceanic sailed out of the harbor of New York, Edith was in the ship going blindfolded to seek the very blessing which, all unknown, she left behind.

CHAPTER LV.
THE SEARCH IN LONDON.

hey went first to the —— St. Hospital, where officers and nurses and matron had all been changed since the night when the child Heloise was left at the door. But the books remained, and after a long time they found the one bearing date nineteen years back. Oh, how eagerly Edith turned the worn, yellow leaves till she came to the date she remembered so well.

“January —, 18—. Was received into the house a female child, found in a basket on the doorstep with the name Heloise pinned upon its dress.”

That was the one, and Edith’s voice trembled so much that she could not speak distinctly, as she asked of the person in attendance:

“Where is this child now? Who took her from here?—and when?”

365Mrs. Simmons, the matron, could not tell. She had herself been there little more than a year, but a careful searching of the books brought to light the fact that not long after the night when the baby Heloise was found on the steps, it had been taken away by a Mrs. Stover, whose daughter Anne was a nurse in the Hospital at the time, and who lived at No. —— Dorset Street. This agreed with the story as told by Mrs. Barrett, and thus far all seemed perfectly plain and easy to the excited woman, whom Colonel Schuyler followed mechanically wheresoever she went. She was taking the lead, not he, but he submitted with a good grace, and went without a word to No —— Dorset Street. It was up two flights of broken, creaking, dirty stairs, and Edith shuddered as she thought how the feet of her own child had probably been up and down this dark stairway, while she, the mother, had lived in luxury and ease.

No. —— was a dirty, wretched apartment, reeking with filth, swarming with children, and smelling of onions and boiled cabbage, and that odor peculiar to rooms where the people sleep and cook and eat and live, and seldom wash themselves. The family were Germans, who could not speak a word of English, and stared wonderingly at the beautiful lady, who succeeded in making herself understood. But she might as well have talked to blocks of wood for aught they knew of any tenants there before them. She managed, however, to make out that on the floor above was an old woman, who had occupied the same room for many years, and to her Edith went next, feeling when she stood in the neat, home-like, though humble apartment of Mrs. Myers as if she had stepped into paradise. Mrs. Myers was very old, and had lived there thirty years, and remembered the Stovers, who occupied the floor below.

“Tidy, clever people, and not at all like the ’orrid Dutch cattle there now,” she said. “There was old Marm Stover, and her two gals Hanny and Mary. Han worked in some ’orspital, and Mary for some grand lady in the country.”

“Was there ever a child living with them,—a little girl with blue eyes and golden hair?” Edith asked.

And the woman replied:

366“There was, mem, and a deal of gossip it made about the girls, though folks mostly laid it to Han, but I never b’lieved a word on’t. It was took from the ’orspital, they said, and had a curis name,—Eloise,—and Mary claimed it as ’ern; and when old Mann Stover died with the cholera, Mary, who was out to service, took the child away, and I’ve never seen her sense, or ’earn tell of her. Was the child anything to you, mem?”

“Yes, everything,—it was mine,” Edith said, impetuously, while her husband, who did not care to have her quite so outspoken, even to this old woman, said, as he took her hand to lead her away:

“Yes, yes,—thank you, Mrs. Myers; this lady has been sick, and we,—yes, we are both anxious to find some trace of the child lost so long ago: but I think it doubtful if we do,—yes, very doubtful. Come, Edith, we may as well go.”

But Edith did not move. She must know something more, and she said:

“Have you no idea where this Mary Stover lived? Had she no friends who could tell me about her?”

“None as I knows on. I ain’t seen or ’earn of her better’n eighteen year. Mebbe the perlice could worrit her out for you.”

Edith had not thought of that, and hurried her husband into the street, and insisted upon going at once to the head of the police.

But the colonel demurred. If they could proceed quietly, he would rather do so, he said, and they would not call in the aid of the police until they had exhausted every means in their power.

And they did exhaust every means; they inquired everywhere, and hunted up every family of Stovers in the city, and went to the hospital again, and went to Mrs. Myers to see if she could not think of something forgotten when they were there before. But all was of no avail. Nobody had ever heard of Mary Stover, and Edith’s heart was heavy as lead when at last the case was given to the police, who had little hope of success.

Worn out, disappointed, and discouraged, Edith took her bed 367at the hotel where they were stopping, while the colonel, who was not so very much aggrieved at the failure of the search, thought to please and interest her by making some inquiries with regard to Gertie Westbrooke, about whose antecedents there was so much doubt and mystery. To trace her history seemed far easier than to trace the mythical Mary Stover, and he went first to the company where her annuity was payable. In answer to his inquiries as to whether they could give him any information with regard to the family, he was told that quite recently a Mrs. William Westbrooke had done some business with them in the way of a deposit. She was a widow, they said, and had come from Florence, where she had lived for many years. It was the same name, possibly the same family,—he could inquire; they could give him the lady’s address.

This he reported to Edith, who roused herself to some interest in the matter after being assured that no parent or guardian could take Gertie from them after all these years.

“If I thought they could I would not try to find them, for I can’t give Gertie up,” she said; while her husband felt that he would be almost as loath to part with Gertie as Edith herself.

And so with more real interest now than he had felt when searching for Mary Stover, he drove with Edith one day to the handsome lodgings occupied by Mrs. William Westbrooke, recently from Florence. She was a little, pale, sandy-haired woman, of forty or thereabouts, very much dressed, and having in her manner something haughty and supercilious as she received the strangers, and, without requesting them to be seated, asked what she could do for them.

It was the colonel who did the talking this time, while Edith listened in a preoccupied kind of way, which, nevertheless, did not prevent her from hearing all that was said.

“We are Americans,” the colonel began, “and we have a young girl in our family of whose antecedents we would learn something. As you have the same name, and bank at the same firm where her annuity of forty pounds a year is paid, it occurred to me to inquire if you have ever heard of a girl called Gertie, or Gertrude Westbrooke, nineteen or twenty years old.”

368“Gertie!—Gertrude!” Mrs. Westbrooke said. “I did know a child by that name years ago; but tell me, please, how she came to be in America living with you?”

It was Edith who talked now, and who told rapidly all she knew of Gertie Westbrooke and her so-called mother, Mrs. Rogers.

“Is it the same? Do you think it the same?” she asked; and Mrs. Westbrooke replied:

“I think it the same; yes.”

“Who is she then? Are you her step-mother?” Edith asked; and, with a frown on her wizened little face, the lady replied:

“No, she is nothing to me. She was adopted by my husband’s first wife just after the loss of her baby, and, as I understood, at the instigation of her nurse, who must have been this Mrs. Rogers. The first Mrs. Westbrooke was greatly attached to the child, and when she died she settled upon it forty pounds a year, and gave it expressly to the care of her maid.

“About a year after her death Mr. Westbrooke married me, and took me to his home in London. I did not like children, and this one was in my way, and as my husband did not care for it either, we gave it at last to the nurse, who took it to keep for her own. My first child was born soon after, and the next year we went to Florence, where my husband died, and where I have lived until within the last few months. Of Gertie I have never heard since. I was told that the nurse, Mary, was married and living comfortably; but from what you say I have no doubt that the young lady in question is the girl, and am glad she has fallen into so good hands. She was very pretty, with great blue eyes and bright auburn hair——”

“What was the name of the nurse?” Edith asked, and the lady replied:

“I don’t remember whom she married, but dare say it was Rogers. My housekeeper will know; she saw her married. Her maiden name was Stover,—Mary Stover.”

“Mary Stover!” and Edith started to her feet as quickly as if a heavy blow had smitten her. “Mary Stover,—tell me if you know where the child came from at first, who were her parents, and how came Mrs. Westbrooke by her?”

369“I do not know as she had any parents, unless it were Mary Stover herself. I always suspected her of being the real mother, she was so attached to the child and so mysterious about it. She brought it to Mrs. Westbrooke from some Foundling Hospital, I believe, where her sister Anne was nurse.”

“Oh, Gertie, Gertie, thank Heaven,” Edith gasped, and the next moment she lay at her husband’s feet with a face as white and rigid and still as are the faces of the dead!

There was great excitement then in Mrs. Westbrooke’s rooms, ringing of bells, gathering of servants, and hurrying for physicians, three of whom came together and concurred in pronouncing it nothing worse than a fainting fit, from which the lady would soon recover.

“Shall I order a room for her here?” Mrs. Westbrooke asked, anxious to relieve herself as soon as possible from her rather troublesome guests.

The colonel, who knew Edith would be happier in their own apartments at the hotel, declined Mrs. Westbrooke’s offer, and as soon as consciousness returned took his wife in his arms, and, carrying her to the carriage waiting for them, was driven back to his hotel, where he laid her upon the couch, and then sat down beside her, waiting for her to speak.

For a moment, however, she could not, and she lay perfectly still with the light of a great and unutterable happiness shining in her eyes and illuminating every feature.

“Edith, darling, you are very glad?” the colonel asked at last.

“Yes, Howard, so glad, oh, so glad;” Edith replied. “God has been so good to me, so good that I never can thank Him enough. That Gertie should be my daughter and living with me all the time; oh, God, I do thank Thee, I do. Howard, you are glad too, glad for Gertie?”

She questioned him eagerly, and he answered her without the slightest hesitancy:

“Yes, Edith, very glad.”

And he was glad, and when, as he was leaving Mrs. Westbrooke, that lady said to him, “Pardon me, if I seem curious, 370but what is the girl Gertie to this lady?” he promptly answered: “Gertie is our daughter,” and with that little pronoun our he adopted Gertie into his heart and love, and felt that she was his as well as Edith’s.

“Our daughter!” That was what he called her to his wife, who clasped her arms around his neck in token that she appreciated this last great kindness of his.

Then they talked together of the beautiful girl whom they had come so far to seek, when all the time she was a part of their own household, and as they talked there naturally enough crept into Edith’s mind the shadow of a fear, lest, after all, there might be some mistake. But there was none apparently, for the colonel made every inquiry possible with regard to Mary Rogers, finding beyond a doubt that she was Mary Stover, and that her sister Anne had been a nurse in —— Street Hospital nineteen years before, and that it was by their mother, then living in Dorset Street, that the child was taken when it left the hospital. There could be no doubt, and as Edith was far too weak and too much overcome to undertake the journey home immediately, the colonel decided to remain a week or two in London, and wrote at once to Glenthorpe, asking Robert to bring Emma to them, but reserving the secret of Gertie’s birth until they came. Then he wrote to Gertie herself, but thought it better not to confide the whole to her until he saw her face to face. So he merely said that being in London he had thought it well to make some inquiries at the —— Bank, and, if possible, discover something of her family.

“And dear Gertie,” he wrote, “you will be no less astonished and delighted than I was to find that beyond the shadow of a doubt you are our own daughter. I cannot tell you all on paper. I only assure you that it is true, and when we return I will explain it to you. Mrs. Schuyler is not very well, but I hope she will be able to return in the Cuba, which sails in two weeks. With love and a kiss for little Arthur, who, I trust, is well, I am,

“Your affectionate father, H. Schuyler.”
371This was his letter, which he read to Edith, who said: “But, Howard, you never told her how my heart is aching for her, or gave her my love or anything.”

“Never mind,” the colonel answered, good-naturedly. “You will have all your lifetime to tell her of your love.”

And so the letter which would tell Gertie so much, and yet so little, was sent, and two days after Robert Macpherson arrived in London, bringing with him Emma, the little lady of Glenthorpe, who was perfectly wild over her husband and her beautiful home among the Highlands, and insisted that her father should go there if only for a few days. “You must see what a good mistress I make, and what a high-bred lady I am to the people who just worship Robert, and I do believe like him all the more because his mother was one of them. I begin to believe in what are called mésalliances after all.”

Now was the time to tell the story of another mésalliance, and the colonel told it, while Robert and Emma listened breathlessly, and when the denouement was reached the latter exclaimed, joyfully:

“Oh, I am so glad, that it is Gertie. She is your cousin, Robert, your own cousin, and it is all just like a story. Oh, I am so glad!”

She evidently did not think it so dreadful to be connected with the Lyles. She had seen the white-haired, sweet-faced old woman in Alnwick, and seen Jenny Nesbit, too, for Robert had taken her there to call, and she had fallen in love with the grandmother, and tried to pet Godfrey Schuyler, now a big boy in jacket and trousers, and had sickened and grown hot and cold by turns at the vulgarity of Mrs. Nesbit, and then in the splendor and éclat of her home at Glenthorpe had forgotten them all and remembered only that she was Robert’s wife, the great lady of the neighborhood and the happiest woman living. Gertie should come and live with her, she said, and marry a Scottish Lord; but Edith shook her head; Gertie was hers. She could not part with her, and her heart was full of an unutterable yearning to behold the young girl again, and hear her call her mother, and she could hardly wait for the day when the 372Cuba sailed at last from the harbor of Liverpool, and she knew she was going home to Gertie.

CHAPTER LVI.
GERTIE.
No. 30 30th Street, New York, February 18, 18—.

o Colonel Schuyler: Your son Godfrey is very dangerously ill with typhoid fever. Come at once.

Mrs. Sophia Wilson.
This was the telegram received at Schuyler Hill one morning in February, and read by Gertie with a heart throbbing with fear and anxiety for the young man dangerously ill with typhoid fever, and only strangers to care for him. But what could she do? The colonel was in Europe, Julia was in Florida, while she had little Arthur to care for, and even if she had not she could not go herself. It would not be proper under any circumstances, and the colonel would not like it. Something, however, must be done, and calling Mrs. Tiffe she read the telegram and said to her:

“You must go.”

So it was arranged that Mrs. Tiffe should take the next train for New York, which passed in about an hour, and she departed to make the necessary arrangements for her journey, just as the postman came bringing a letter for Gertie. It was from Colonel Schuyler, and Gertie tore it open and read what it contained with emotions which it is impossible to describe. At first she was stunned and bewildered, and thought it must be somebody else, some other Gertie he meant.

“It is not I, surely; it cannot be I, who am his daughter,” she whispered to herself, and then she read again:

“Beyond the shadow of a doubt you are our own daughter.”

It was there in black and white, and it was Colonel Schuyler’s signature, and he signed himself her father. Then the 373room turned dark to Gertie; there was a humming in her ears, and for a moment she half lost her consciousness, but soon recovering she read the letter for the third time, whispering to herself:

“My father,—his child,—who then was my mother?” and as she said it her face flushed with shame as she thought what she must be if this tale were true and Colonel Schuyler her sire. She never dreamed of associating Edith with the matter in any way. Only Colonel Schuyler had an interest in her, and that of such a nature that the knowledge of it brought far more pain than pleasure to one as pure and good as she.

If Colonel Schuyler were her father, then the man whom she vaguely remembered in the home near London could have been nothing to her, and for this she was not especially sorry. But to lose the gentlewoman whom she had been taught to think her mother, was terrible, and Gertie rebelled against it. She would cling to the memory of that woman, even if she had sinned, as the story of her birth would imply. And this was why Mary Rogers had always been so reticent with regard to her antecedents, why she had spoken with so much certainty of her mother as a lady, and said so little of her father. Possibly Mary had not known who her father was, and possibly the man whom she remembered was only the brother or father of the pale woman who died, and that would account for his dislike of her. These and similar fancies flitted rapidly through Gertie’s mind, until she settled it beyond a doubt that the man she called father, and who she thought was buried in Italy, had been her mother’s near relation, and not her father, that no marriage rite could have hallowed her birth, and as she thought it her face and neck and hands were crimson, and she longed for some place in which to hide her dishonored head. Then, swift as lightning, another thought flashed into her mind, cutting like a knife and making her cringe with pain. If she was Colonel Schuyler’s daughter, even in an unlawful way, then Godfrey was her brother, and alas, she did not want him that. She could never be his wife, she knew; but it was sweet to know he loved her as he would never love another, and she could not be his sister.

374“Oh, Godfrey, Godfrey!” she moaned; “this is the hardest part of all. I can forgive my mother, feeling sure that she was more sinned against than sinning, and I may in time forgive your father and mine; but I do not want you for my brother. Godfrey, Godfrey, I never loved you before as I do now, when this has risen up to separate us forever.”

Then she remembered the telegram, and starting up exclaimed:

“If I am his sister I may surely go to him. I have a right, and no one can gainsay it.”

She was in Mrs. Tiffe’s room in an instant, and greatly astonished that good woman by declaring her intention of going herself to New York to take care of Godfrey.

“You, you go to nurse a young man! Are you crazy, child?” Mrs. Tiffe exclaimed.

Gertie did not know whether she was crazy or not; she half believed she was, but on one point she was decided. She should go to New York, and she put on her cloak and furs and hat, and bidding Mrs. Tiffe take good care of Arthur, and send her a few articles of wearing apparel by the next day’s express, went out of the house and started for the station on foot before Mrs. Tiffe had time to realize fully what it meant, and that after all the trouble of packing her trunk and ordering the servants what to do in her absence, she must stay at home and let Gertie go in her place.

“It will be the ruination of her,” she said, “for folks will talk,” and nothing but the fact that the whistle of the train was just then heard in the distance, prevented her from starting in hot pursuit. “I can’t get there now with the swiftest horse in the stable,” she reflected, and she did not believe Gertie would be in time either.

But she was, for when she too heard the train she ran like a frightened deer, and half-stumbled, half-fell upon the platform of the rear car just as it was beginning to move from the station.

375
CHAPTER LVII.
IN NEW YORK.

odfrey was very sick, and had been for some days, though it was not until the morning when the telegram was forwarded that his fever assumed the typhoid form and danger was apprehended. A message had been sent to his Aunt Rossiter when he first became ill, but she was in Washington with Miss Creighton, and as the landlady knew nothing of the Calverts, her only alternative was to telegraph to Schuyler Hill, when the matter became alarming and her boarder delirious. Oh, how he tossed and rolled and raved and talked, fancying himself on the sea, and twice throwing himself out of bed because that was the proper thing to do when the ship gave a great lurch as the waves broke over it. Then he was sea-sick and tried to vomit, and wore himself out in his efforts, and screamed to a fancied Bob in the upper berth, to know how he was coming through. Then he stormed at Dan for bringing him sea-water to drink, and when the ship began to pitch again he tried to stand upon his head, and then sprang back upon his feet to preserve his equilibrium, he said to the scandalized and horrified Mrs. Wilson, who fled from him in dismay as the worst-behaved sick man she had ever seen. Then as the vessel ceased to pitch he grew more quiet, and only rolled with the imaginary ship, and talked about “La Sœur,” and begged his landlady to bring her to him, and promised to stop rolling if she would.

Utterly at her wits’ end to know what he meant by La Sœur, or what to do with him, Mrs. Wilson was waiting impatiently for some response to her telegram, when the bell rang and a little, white-faced girl stepped into the hall and announced herself as having come to take care of Mr. Schuyler.

“You take care of him?” Mrs. Wilson exclaimed, when she had recovered from her first astonishment and surprise. “You 376take care of him? It is impossible. Why, it needs a strong man to manage him; he is just awful; he’s got it in his head that he is sea-sick, and rolls and pitches with the boat, and calls to Bob in the upper berth, and insists upon my bringing him la surr, whatever that may be——”

“Yes, that’s sister, that’s French,—that’s I,” Gertie said. “I am his sister, and have come to nurse him. His father is in Europe, his eldest sister Julia is in Florida, the next one is in Scotland, and so there was no one to come but me. Will you take me to him, please?”

After this explanation there was no demurring on Mrs. Wilson’s part. If that young girl was his sister she had a right to nurse her brother, and she led the way to the third floor, where in the room looking into the area Godfrey was still rolling with the ship, and occasionally mimicking and calling to some cats fighting on the fence in the yard below. These cats had been the bane of Godfrey’s life even before he was sick. Regularly every night they came, sometimes two, sometimes three, and sometimes half a dozen, and made the neighborhood hideous with their music.

Godfrey had thrown his boot-jack at them, and his poker and soap-dish and bits of coal, and when all these failed he had tried the effect of fire-crackers and frightened the people opposite, who thought him a madman trying to fire the house! And still the cats fought on, and since Godfrey’s illness they had been terrible, and he was up on his elbow “sca-ating” to them, when the door opened and Gertie was ushered in. He knew her, and forgetting the cats and the ship, and Bob in the upper berth, he hailed her advent with a cry of joy.

“La Sœur, La Sœur,” he cried, “you’ve come,—you’ve come at last, and now you’ll stop that infernal noise and make the ship stand still. I’m pounded nearly to a jelly with all this rolling and pitching.”

He held his arms toward her, and she went to him and laid her cool hands on his burning brow, and pushed back his tangled curls, but did not kiss him. She could not bring herself to do that, even if she were his sister, but she held his hot hands 377in hers and tried to soothe and quiet him, and told him she would kill the cats and make the ship stand still, and talked to him till he grew quiet and fell away to sleep.

When the doctor came, he was told that Mr. Schuyler’s sister was there, and Gertie blushed and felt herself a guilty thing when he addressed her as Miss Schuyler, and gave directions about the medicines she was to give, and asked if there was no older person to come in her place.

“None but the housekeeper, and Godfrey prefers me,” she said, while Godfrey, who was listening, chimed in:

“That’s so. I’d rather have Gertie than the whole world besides. She’s a trump,—she’s a brick,—she’s a——”

“Hush, Godfrey, if you want me to stay you must not talk,” Gertie said, laying her hand upon his lips.

He kissed it, of course, and when she snatched it away, told her to put it back again if she did not want him to roll out of bed with the ship, which was lurching awfully! And she put it back and held it there so tight that he could neither kiss it nor speak, nor scarcely breathe.

“Godfrey,” she said a little sternly, when the doctor had gone out, “if you do not behave and stop talking and trying to kiss me, and if you attempt to roll out of bed, or get up, no matter how much the ship rocks, I will not stay with you a moment, but go home in the next train.”

This had the desired effect and brought forth earnest protestations of intended good behavior from Godfrey, who promised not to move but “to stand to his guns,” even if the ship should turn a complete somersault, which he guessed it would, judging from the way it was reeling and tossing now.

After that he was comparatively quiet, or if he became very restless and showed a disposition to repeat his tumbling exploits when the sea was badly in his head, a word from Gertie controlled him and kept him on his pillow. But his fever ran higher and higher every day, and his pulse beat faster and faster as the imaginary ship went plunging, through the waves which threatened to engulf it.

Gertie had told him she was his sister, that his father had 378written so from London, and once when he seemed something like himself she read the letter to him, but he repelled the idea with scorn. She was not his sister. He did not want any more sisters. She was Gertie,—his Gertie,—his in spite of everybody, he said, and he seemed to know just when she was with him, even if he did not see her, and when she left the room he would moan and rave and talk until she came back, and by a touch of her hand or a single word made him quiet again.

And so the days went on, and the fever increased, and the vessel rocked worse and worse, and Godfrey’s brain grew more and more affected, and Gertie’s heart was very sore with the fear that he would die. “Brother” she called him now when she spoke to him, and he was no longer furious as he had been at that name coming from her lips. He did not seem to know what she said, only that she was with him,—that it was her hand which gave the medicine he would take from no one else,—her hand which bathed his temples and kept him firmly in his place when the sea was doing its worst,—her hand which rescued his poor, aching head from the stewardess, who was boiling water in it to make him some beef-tea. Oh, what dreadful fancies he had,—fancies which were wearing him out so fast, and which nobody could manage but Gertie. And her strength was giving way, and the roses were fading from her cheek, when one morning, about ten days after her arrival in New York, a servant knocked at the door and ushered in Miss Rossiter.

She had returned from Washington the night before, and, finding the note which had been sent to her when Godfrey became so ill, had come immediately after breakfast to see how he was. With a feeling that it would not be proper for her to go into his sick-room, Alice, who was stopping up town, remained at home, bidding Miss Rossiter give her love to Godfrey, and tell him she would come if he wished to see her.

Mrs. Wilson was out marketing when Miss Rossiter came, and whatever information that lady received concerning her nephew, she had from the servant who escorted her to his room.

“His sister with him! I did not know she had returned,” 379she said, in some surprise, when in reply to the question, “Who takes care of him?” the servant said:

“His sister, ma’am. She has been here more than a week.”

Miss Rossiter had spent a day in Hampstead the previous summer, and seen Gertie; but she had no thought of her now, and was utterly astonished and confounded, as she entered the room, to find Gertie Westbrooke sitting by Godfrey, who was sleeping from the effects of a powerful opiate which the doctor had administered an hour or so before.

At the sound of the opening door she looked up and gave a warning “Sh-hh!” as Miss Rossiter exclaimed, loudly:

“Gertie,—Gertie Westbrooke! Why are you here calling yourself his sister? Are you not ashamed? What does it mean? Tell me before I venture to stop a moment in the same room with you!”

And the highly indignant and rigidly virtuous spinster held back her clothes lest they should come in contact with the garments of the young girl, thus outraging every rule of propriety if not of decency.

Alice, who had been and in some sense still considered herself his affianced wife, would not so much as come to the house unless it was necessary, while even she, a matron of fifty and more, had some doubts about going herself into the room; and lo, here was the young girl,—this stranger,—sitting by him with the utmost familiarity, and bidding her be quiet and speak lower lest the sick man should awaken.

Miss Rossiter was greatly shocked, and, as her first question was not answered except by a look of innocent wonder, she repeated it angrily:

“Why are you here, passing for his sister? Don’t you know your good name will be ruined forever?”

Only an hour before the doctor had said to Gertie:

“There is but one chance in a hundred for your brother. If he can be made to sleep and be kept quiet, he may recover, but if the paroxysms and his fancy about the ship return he will die. Do your best for him.”

380In dumb despair Gertie listened to him with such pain in her heart as sisters never feel.

“I’ll do my best,” she said, and her white lips quivered, but she did not cry as she took her seat by Godfrey to watch him while he slept, and thought what life would be to her without him. “Godfrey dead, Godfrey dead,” she whispered, softly. “I should want to die, too. Oh, Godfrey, you are more than my brother, more than my brother.”

It was just as she said this that Miss Rossiter came in, and the sick man stirred upon his pillow as if about to waken. He must not wake. It was death to do so, and Gertie bent protectingly over him as a mother bends over her restless child, and until it was twice repeated she did not answer the astonished woman’s question, “Why are you here, and why call yourself his sister?”

Then she turned, and fixing her blue eyes steadily on the lady, she said, in a low whisper:

“Col. Schuyler is in Europe; there was no one else to come, and I am his sister; read that.”

She had the colonel’s letter in her pocket, where she kept it constantly, and she passed it to Miss Rossiter, who read it rapidly, and then, more surprised and bewildered than she had ever been in her life, began to question Gertie, who, of course, could offer no explanation.

“The thing is simply impossible. Colonel Schuyler was not in Europe nineteen years ago,” Miss Rossiter said, after a little mental calculation.

“Mother might have been in America,” was Gertie’s response, quietly and sadly spoken, and then Miss Rossiter began again to question her as to what she herself knew of her antecedents, or what she had heard from Mary Rogers.

The murmur of voices disturbed Godfrey, who moaned about the ship which would not be still. Then Gertie said to her companion:

“Miss Rossiter, you must not talk. If Godfrey gets well he must sleep; the doctor said so. He has fancied himself in a ship at sea, and endured all the agonies of sea-sickness. I have 381succeeded in making him believe he was on the land, but if the ship gets back into his head, he will die.”

She spoke decidedly, like one who had a right, and the proud woman bit her lip with vexation, but obeyed the girl who had so suddenly come before her in a new phase of character. She could not credit the story she had heard, and yet there it was in the colonel’s handwriting, “You are our daughter.” Even she never thought of Edith as connected with it, and in her own mind she ran over the name of every lady of her acquaintance who could by any possibility be implicated in the affair. But all in vain. She could find no clue to the mystery, and was obliged to give it up and wait for further developments when the colonel returned. Though she did not fully believe the story she felt more kindly toward Gertie, and when at last Godfrey awoke and was in the ship again, and insisted that La Sœur should sit behind him and hold his head on her bosom to keep it from bumping against the side of the berth, she bade Gertie sit there, and offered no remonstrance when the pale face bent so low over the flushed, feverish one that the girl’s bright hair mingled with the brown curls of the sick man who called her “La petite capitaine,” and said she was steering him through the waves like an old salt!

Miss Rossiter could not go home while matters were in this state, and she wrote a note to Alice, asking that a dressing-gown might be sent to her with a few other articles necessary for the sick-room. Alice brought them herself, and sat in the parlor and cried when Miss Rossiter told her of Godfrey, and opened her eyes with wonder when told of Gertie and the relation she bore to Colonel Schuyler, if his word could be trusted. Alice believed it, and it lifted a load from her mind. If Gertie was Godfrey’s sister, then she ceased to be a rival, and in the first revulsion of feeling Alice felt very kindly toward Gertie, and expressed so strong a desire to see her that, at Miss Rossiter’s request, Gertie went down to the little lady, who received her rather gushingly. Alice forgave easily, and when she saw Gertie so pale and worn, and knew that it came from watching by Godfrey when there was no one else to care for 382him, she forgot her old animosity entirely, and kissing her twice told her what a good girl she was to stay with Godfrey when he was so sick, and the fever catching, perhaps.

“And you are his sister, too?” she continued. “It is very strange, but I am so glad, and everything will turn out well if Godfrey only lives. Do you think he will?”

Gertie could not tell. He was very sick, she said, and she seemed so anxious to return to him that Alice arose to go. Standing a moment irresolutely and looking at Gertie she said:

“You are a nice little girl, and always were, and when Godfrey can understand, will you tell him I have been here, and that I am so sorry, and—and——”

She could not quite say what she wanted to, but Gertie knew what she meant, and answered her:

“I’ll tell him, and do all I can for you. I think it will come right now.”

She said it sadly, with a pang of regret for the condition of things which might result in healing the difference between Godfrey and Alice, and her heart was very heavy as she went back to her patient, who was conducting himself outrageously. They were in a regular north-easter, he said, and the ship was bottom side up, and he was bottom side up with it, and to the horror of his aunt had rolled himself and the bed-clothes out upon the floor, where he lay calling for La capitaine to come and right the ship! With the help of her man-servant, who had accompanied Alice, and who was to stay as long as he was needed, Miss Rossiter got her nephew back to bed, and when Gertie came in he was panting with exhaustion, and evidently bracing himself against another lurch.

“Don’t desert,” he whispered to Gertie. “We had a tremendous swell while you were away, and things generally got topsy-turvy.”

That swell was the last. He never attempted to roll again, but sank gradually into a state of unconsciousness more alarming than the lurches of the imaginary ship had been. The vessel was quiet now, wrecked, and going down so fast, it seemed to the heart-broken girl who watched beside poor Godfrey day 383and night with a look of anguish on her face which touched Miss Rossiter, and awoke within her a feeling of interest for the heart-sore creature, whose pain she in a measure understood.

At last the colonel came. He had gone straight to Hampstead within an hour after landing in New York, and hearing from Mrs. Tiffe of his son’s illness, and that a telegram to the effect that he was worse had been received that afternoon, he had taken the night train back to the city, leaving Edith at Schuyler Hill, as she was not able to accompany him. Thus it was near midnight when he reached Mrs. Wilson’s boarding-house, and asked eagerly for his son.

“Very bad,—dying we fear,” was the report, and he sped swiftly up the stairs, stumbling in the upper landing over a little figure which sat crying on the floor.

It was Alice who had come down that afternoon to inquire for Godfrey, and on learning of his condition had refused to go home, and lingered outside the door of the room she would not enter lest she should be guilty of an indiscretion, or, perhaps, contract the fever.

Poor Godfrey, how white and ghastly and quiet he was now, as with his eyes shut he lay with his head pillowed on Gertie’s arm, and one of his hands holding to her dress as if afraid of losing her.

Gertie had sat thus for more than an hour gazing upon the pale face she held, her eyes heavy with unshed tears, for she could not cry any more. Her heart ached too hard for that. Godfrey was dying,—her Godfrey,—he said he was the last time he spoke to her, and he had called her his little Gertie, and kissed her hand and bade her stay with him on the ship which was sailing in smooth waters now and was almost at the shore. And he was hers,—her brother, perhaps, but still hers more than anybody else’s in all the wide, wide world.

Alice had sent a message to her: “Kiss him once for me!” but Gertie would not do it. She might, perhaps, kiss a dead Godfrey, but Godfrey living must know when she kissed him, and why, and so she only held his head and wiped the sweat 384from his brow, and let her own face fall over and touch his for a minute, while she whispered in his ear and asked if he still heard her and knew she was with him.

And it was thus she sat when the colonel came, and going up to his son called him by his name. But there was no response, no sign, and the physician who stood waiting, said:

“He heeds no one but his sister. Speak to him, Miss Schuyler. See if he knows you now.”

Then, over the whiteness of Gertie’s face, there came a flush at hearing herself called Miss Schuyler in the presence of the colonel, but she put her lips close to Godfrey’s ear, and said:

“Godfrey, do you know me yet?”

“Yes, my Gertie, stick to the ship, we are about ready to land,” was the faint reply; and with a bitter cry, as if at the sight of the man who called himself her father every barrier had gone down, Gertie gave way, and winding both her arms round the form she held, sobbed passionately:

“Oh, Godfrey, my darling, if you can hear me now, listen while I tell you how much I love you, for I do,—I do, oh, Godfrey, oh, Colonel Schuyler,” and she lifted her white face piteously to him. “Forgive me, if I am wrong, I cannot,—cannot love him as a brother.”

Her head drooped upon her bosom, and it was in vain that Godfrey whispered:

“Steady now, La petite capitaine, the boat is running into port.”

CHAPTER LVIII.
GERTIE AND THE STORY.

ertie did not go into Godfrey’s room again, nor was it necessary, as he was very quiet and seemed to be sleeping, while his father sat by him with his head bowed down, and such marks of age upon him that Miss Rossiter asked him if he were sick. He did not hear her at first, and she said, again:

385“Howard, are you sick? Have you any trouble on your mind?”

Then he looked up, with a faint smile, and answered her:

“Trouble? sick? No, not sick, and no trouble now; that is past. I say, Christine, have I grown very old? isn’t my hair turning gray? I did not like to ask Edith, because, you see, the—the trouble concerned her the most.”

Miss Rossiter was sure of it. That woman, whom she never liked, had shown her colors at last, and here was the result in the colonel’s bowed form and fast-turning hair. He had grown old and his hair was gray, and she told him so, and added:

“Poor Howard, tell me about it. I knew it must come to this when you married her.”

“Did you know anything about it?” the colonel asked, in some surprise; and Miss Rossiter replied:

“Know about what? I knew it was a mésalliance, and they always prove unhappy.”

“Hush, Christine, it is not that,” and the colonel spoke sternly, “Edith is a noble woman. She has been so tempted and tried, and is so broken now. Christine, I wish you were her friend, my friend. I want so much to unburden myself to some one. It would be such a relief. Christine, try and like my wife, and let me tell you the strangest tale you ever heard, and let me feel that we have your sympathy and support in the storm which will blow so hard.”

He looked at her so pleadingly that Miss Rossiter’s heart was moved, and she said:

“I like you, Howard, and know nothing against Edith as a woman. She is beautiful and you love her, and I daresay she is good, and I will be your friend: tell me the story, please; is it about Gertie? She showed me your letter in which you called her your daughter. What does it mean?”

Colonel Schuyler glanced at his son, who was still sleeping quietly, then drawing his chair closer to Miss Rossiter and speaking in the lowest possible whisper for her to hear, he told her the story from beginning to end. And Miss Rossiter neither 386fainted nor went into hysterics, but for her behaved remarkably well, and with the exception of a few ejaculations of amazement when the story was at the most exciting point, never spoke a word until the colonel had told her everything there was to tell. Then her first remark was:

“I am so glad it is Gertie. You need not be ashamed of her.”

“Thank you, Christine,” the colonel said; “and now who will tell her, you or I, and when?”

“You, and as soon as she can bear it. I think she is too tired now, too much fatigued; she ought to have perfect rest. If I knew Godfrey was out of danger I should take her home with me. Perhaps I had better do it anyway,” Miss Rossiter replied, wondering at herself and her interest in Gertie Westbrooke, and why she could not feel more indignant at that woman, who really had been in a way an impostor after all.

Miss Rossiter was peculiar, and often did things and took fancies which astonished those who knew her best. And this was one of her fancies. Colonel Schuyler had confided in her first, had told her everything, and asked her to stand by him, and she was going to, and would begin by being very kind to Gertie, toward whom she had been greatly drawn during the days and nights they had watched together by Godfrey’s bedside. After her conference with the colonel was finished, and the doctor had been in and declared the danger past for Godfrey, she went to Gertie and Alice in the adjoining room and telling them the good news, said to the former:

“Colonel Schuyler and myself both think it better for you to go where you can have perfect rest and quiet for a few days, lest you take the fever also. My carriage will be here in an hour or so; you know it comes every day, and as I am not needed at present, I shall go home and take you with me.”

Gertie was lying on the couch, with her hands pressed to her head, which was aching terribly. But she put them away, and lifting her heavy eyes wonderingly to Miss Rossiter’s face said:

“Go home with you! Do you wish it?”

“Certainly; I should not suggest it if I did not,” Miss Rossiter answered, a little stiffly.

387And Gertie continued:

“But my,—Colonel Schuyler,—he has not told me yet. I must know about that before I can rest anywhere.”

“Yes; but you must rest a little first, he says. You will need strength and courage both to hear what he has just told me,” Miss Rossiter replied; and then, as Gertie was about to speak again, she added: “Not a word more at present. This afternoon, if he can leave Godfrey, the colonel will come and tell you all.”

And with this Gertie was obliged to be satisfied; and an hour later she was driven with Miss Rossiter to the handsome house far up town, which she had never thought it possible for her to enter as she was entering it now.

Alice had decided to go to her own home proper at Uncle Calvert’s, and Gertie was alone with Miss Rossiter, who gave her the room near hers, where Alice slept when she was there.

And here, late in the day, Colonel Schuyler came, and was brought up by Miss Rossiter, who withdrew and left him alone with Gertie.

She was pale as marble, save where two bright red spots burned on her cheeks, and her eyes were heavy as lead, but they brightened with eagerness and excitement when the colonel came in and drew his chair beside her as she lay upon the couch.

“Don’t try to rise,” he said, as she made an effort to sit up. “You are too tired and worn; keep as you are while I am talking to you. Gertie, it is a very strange story I am about to tell you, and that it may come to you by degrees, I will tell you first why we went to England so suddenly, and that when we went we had no thought of you, or that we should discover who you were. We were hunting for another child.”

Gertie was looking steadily at him, and her eyes never left his face while he told her the story, beginning with the time when he first asked Edith to be his wife, and she hinted at a page of her life of which she wished to tell him, and which after so many years, had come to him by accident.

388“I have the letter with me,” he said; “I brought it on purpose to read to you, as it will tell the story so much better than I can.”

Taking out Edith’s letter he read it aloud, while Gertie’s eyes deepened their gaze upon his face, and the red all died from her cheeks, which were of an ashen hue, as when the letter was finished, he went on to tell how the child was not dead, as Edith had supposed, and of their search in London, which they gave at last into the hands of the police.

“Then, while we were waiting,” he said, “I thought to make some inquiries about you at the office where your annuity is paid. There I heard of a Mrs. Westbrooke, recently from Florence, and to her we went, hoping she might know something of you, and she did. She was the second wife of the man who was not your father, but whose first wife adopted you when her own baby died. Her maid, Mary Stover, afterward Mrs. Rogers, told her of you, and brought you to her from her mother, who had taken you from the —— Street Foundling Hospital, where you had been left on the steps, and where Mary Stover’s sister Anne was at that time nurse.

“Gertie, are you going to faint? Do you hear me? Do you understand?” the colonel asked, alarmed at the expression of the face still confronting him so steadily, and never moving a muscle any more than if the features had been chiselled in stone.

“Yes, I think—I understand,” came huskily from the livid lips, “that baby, born in Dorset Street, and left on the hospital steps, and hunted for by you—and—and—her—was—was—I, and she—your—Mrs. Schuyler—is—my mother—and that—that grave I’ve tended always—is—is my father’s!”

She understood it perfectly, but the colonel thought to make it clearer by saying:

“Yes, Gertie, you are the child of my wife, Mrs. Schuyler, born in lawful wedlock, and Abelard Lyle was your father!”

He opened the window and carried Gertie to it, and let the cool air blow on her, and dashed water on her face, and only that he had seen Edith thus more than once, would have 389thought her dead, when he laid her back upon the couch and went to summon help. Miss Rossiter watched with Gertie that night and many other nights, while the fever contracted at Godfrey’s bedside, and brought to a crisis by the terrible shock which she had sustained, ran its course. There were a few moments of consciousness that first night, when Gertie’s eyes opened and looked up at Miss Rossiter, who was bending over her.

“Am I very sick?” she asked faintly, and Miss Rossiter replied:

“Pretty sick, yes; but we hope to have you well soon if you are quiet.”

“Am I going to have the fever like Godfrey?”

“Yes, we think you are, though not so hard.”

“Miss Rossiter, if I am very sick, very,—I want her to come,—mother,—Mrs. Schuyler,—you know.”

“Yes, I know.”

“And if I don’t know her, if I never know her, tell her please, that I have loved her since I first saw her a bride in England, and gave the flowers to her; and tell her, too, I’ve loved that Heloise Fordham ever since Miss Armstrong told me about her and the lover who died, and my name is Heloise, too,—Gertrude Heloise,—and there’s a spot of blood right over my heart; she will find it there if I die.”

“Yes, I will tell her.”

“And tell Godfrey,—oh, what message shall I leave for Godfrey? Tell him I loved him,—more than he ever knew; but he must marry Alice for my sake. Tell him it was my wish.”

“I’ll tell him.”

“And Miss Rossiter, let me kiss you once, please, because you are so kind. I used to think you proud, and guess I did not like you, but I do now. I like everybody.”

The kiss was given, and, strangest part of all, returned, for Miss Rossiter’s heart was very soft toward the young girl, who, having said all she had to say, folded her hands upon her bosom, and whispering the little prayer, “Now I lay me,” learned when she was a child, sank into unconsciousness, from which she did 390not awake until the first April rains were falling, and there was a breath of coming summer in the soft spring air. If that sickness can be called pleasant when the fever runs so high that the pulse cannot be counted, and the breath of life almost fleets away, then Gertie’s sickness was a pleasant one, and never sure before or since was there a patient so docile, and quiet, and manageable as she, taking always what they bade her take, lying just where they put her, and seldom moving hand or foot save as they moved them for her. Like Godfrey, she was out on the broad sea, sailing away to parts unknown, but with her there were no storms, no sudden lurches, no rollings, no pitchings, no swelling waves threatening to engulf her. All was smooth and quiet and calm, as a river of glass, and the sun by day shone upon the water, flecking it with spots of gold, while the moon and stars at night looked down on the blue expanse, and lit it up with sheets of silvery light, into which Gertie went gliding, with Godfrey at her side. Always Godfrey, who stood at the helm and managed the oars, and managed the sails, and talked to her of love, which it was right for her now to accept. In that pleasant dream there was no Alice in the way, no father to dissent, but all was bright and clear, and the boat went drifting on and on, always in moonlight or sunlight, always on a smooth, still sea, till they came in sight of a far-off country, where golden streets and gates of pearl gleamed in the setting sun, and the boat paused mid stream, and waited whether the soul would cross to the beautiful city, or turning, take the homeward route and come back to life again. It chose the latter, and came slowly back, with sails all drooping and torn, and more ripples on the waves than had been in the journey out. Godfrey was no longer in the boat, Gertie had lost him somewhere, and was hunting sadly for him until a voice, which sounded much like his, said to her: “Gertie, I am here, and shall never leave you again.”

Then her little plaintive moan, “Godfrey, oh, where is Godfrey?” ceased, and when she spoke again, it was to a beautiful woman, who, she thought, was standing by her, and calling her “my daughter.” Oh, how that mother-love brooded over 391the sick girl, soothing and quieting and comforting her, and with its pleading prayers bringing at last the healing power which unlocked the sleeping senses, and made Gertie whole again. For Edith was there with her, and had been since the third day of her illness, when the colonel’s telegram went up the river, saying: “Gertie is very sick. Come immediately.”

CHAPTER LIX.
THE STORY IN HAMPSTEAD.

 was at the Hill when the telegram was received. In fact I had been there ever since the day of Edith’s return from Europe and the colonel’s departure for New York. I had with others been waiting anxiously for them, for I knew how sick Godfrey was, and that Gertie, whether right or wrong, was helping to nurse him. So when I saw the carriage drive past the door, and caught a glimpse of Edith, I went over at once, and was shocked beyond measure to see how she had changed. All the roundness had left her cheeks, her bright color was gone, and in her tresses of golden brown there were a few threads of silver. And still, despite all this, she was very lovely, with such a subdued gentleness of manner and sweet expression of face that I felt the tears rush to my eyes every time I looked at her.

“Stay with me, Ettie, while the colonel is absent,” she said, and she seemed so anxious for my company that I consented to remain, and after Colonel Schuyler was gone we went up to her room, where she paced up and down, up and down, with a restlessness for which I could not account, unless it came from anxiety for Godfrey.

At last I said:

“You are troubled about Godfrey, Mrs. Schuyler,” and she replied:

“Yes,—no. I was not thinking of him, but of Gertie. Ettie, 392do you remember the people who lived in the cottage years ago, Mrs. Fordham and her daughter?”

“Yes,” I replied, “I remember them well. Why do you ask me that question?”

She was standing by the window now, gazing wistfully at the cottage and the smoke curling from the chimney.

“Did you like that girl? Heloise was her name,” she said, without answering my question.

“Yes,” I answered, “I was very fond of her, and thought her so beautiful, and I have often wondered where she was that she neither came back nor wrote, when she promised to do both.”

Crossing swiftly to my side and laying a hand on each of my shoulders she looked me steadily in the eye, and said:

“Ettie, is there anything in my face which reminds you of that girl?”

Then it came to me like a flash of lightning; all the perplexity and wonder I had at times experienced with regard to Mrs. Schuyler was made clear, and without stopping to think how it could be and thinking only that it was, I said:

“You are Heloise!” while my knees shook so that I was compelled to sit down upon the nearest chair to keep myself from falling.

“Yes, I was Heloise Fordham once,” she answered, her lip quivering and the great tears gathering in her eyes and rolling down her cheeks. “Ettie,” she continued, “I wanted to tell you so many times, but dared not, for until that sickness of mine in November my husband even did not know it.”

At this I looked up in surprise, and she went on:

“I asked you to stay with me that I might tell you the story first, and let you break it to the people, for I will have no more concealments.”

Then she told me the whole story, and to my dying day I shall not forget the ringing sweetness and joy in her voice when she said:

“Gertie is my daughter.”

I had heard the rest of the story with a tolerable degree of 393equanimity, but that last electrified me like the shock from a battery, and springing to my feet I exclaimed:

“Gertie your daughter! Gertie your child!”

“Yes, Ettie, God has been good to me. He has taken care of my little baby girl and made her into a woman whom any mother might love; and oh, how I do love her, and how hard it is for me to stay here and know that she is only two hours away. But we thought it best for my husband to go first and tell her before I saw her. He offered to do that; he tries to spare me all he can; oh, he is so good and kind, and has behaved so nobly through it all.”

She was crying now, and I did not try to stop her, for I knew tears would do her good. And she was calmer after it, and talked with me until long after midnight of the strange story and the old life at the cottage when we both were girls.

Early the next morning the colonel’s first telegram came: “Godfrey is very sick, but out of danger, we hope. Miss Rossiter and Gertie both here; the latter well, but tired.”

I doubt if Edith paid much attention to anything but the last of the telegram, the part relating to Gertie. This she read and re-read, as if there were a pleasure even in the sight of the dear name.

“You see Mrs. Westbrooke named her Gertrude for her own little girl who died,” she explained to me, “and as she did not know whether she had been baptized or not she had her christened ‘Gertrude Heloise Westbrooke,’ so Westbrooke really is her name, and I am glad, for I know my husband would rather have it that than Lyle.”

After lunch came another telegram: “Godfrey better. Gertie at Miss Rossiter’s. Shall see her to-night.”

That evening Edith was like a crazy woman walking up and down the halls, and then through her suite of rooms and back again into the hall, clasping her hands tightly together, and whispering to herself:

“Is it now he is telling her? Does she know it yet? And what does she think of me, her mother? Will she call me by that name? Oh, Gertie, if I could see you now. Heaven grant you do not hate me.”

394Suddenly she grew calm, and said to me:

“Something tells me it is over. Gertie knows the truth and does not hate me. Thank my Heavenly Father for that.”

Edith slept that night, but was restless and impatient in the morning until the third message came. “She knows everything, and is very glad.”

“Then why doesn’t she come home?” Edith said, and all that day she was in a feverish state of expectancy when a train from New York came in.

But Gertie did not come, and the next day we read the words: “Gertie is very sick. Come immediately.”

Then Edith frightened me, she turned so white and stood so still, while the iron fingers clutched her throat for the last time, and strangled her until her face was purple. I rang for help, but before it came the fingers relaxed their grasp, the natural color came back to the face, and Edith was herself again. Fortunately it was her maid who answered the ring, and telling her of the dispatch, and that she was going to New York, Edith bade her pack her travelling valise, and order the carriage for the next train, due in half an hour.

“Oh, Ettie,” she cried, when we were alone, “God will not take her from me now. Pray that He will spare Gertie.”

I think she prayed constantly, while getting herself ready, for her lips moved continually, and I caught the whispered words: “Don’t,—don’t,” and knew she was pleading for Gertie’s life. I went with her to the station and saw her on the train, and then returned to the Hill, charged with the responsibility of acquainting the household, and as many others as I saw fit with the story which it was better to have known while the family was absent.

I found Mrs. Tiffe in her own room, and with her a Mrs. Noall, a great gossip but a thoroughly good-natured and well-meaning woman, and though she told all she knew, never told any more, and always told it as she heard it. Here was a good opportunity for the news to be thoroughly disseminated without much help from me, further than the telling it first to my auditors. And this it was easy to do, for they were talking of 395Mrs. Schuyler when I went in, and Mrs. Noall was wondering why they came home from Europe so suddenly, and why they both seemed so broken and worn. She surmised that the colonel’s finances were in a very precarious condition; she knew he had suffered some heavy losses recently and perhaps he was going to fail.

“It is not that,” I said. “It is something entirely different which has troubled Mr. and Mrs. Schuyler, and I have come in on purpose to tell you, as Mrs. Schuyler wishes the people to know it before her return.”

Then, taking a chair between the two dames I told the story of Edith’s life, interrupted frequently by questions and ejaculations from my auditors, both of whom were more amazed than they had ever been before in their lives. Mrs. Tiffe was the first to recover herself. She had the family dignity to maintain, and she was going to do it, and while she condemned the Fordham woman out and out, she stood firmly by Edith as more sinned against than sinning, and said that she for one thought more of her than ever, and that every right-minded person would agree with her, of course. Mrs. Noall, who was usually chary of offending Mrs. Tiffe, fully agreed with her, and both expressed unbounded delight that the lost child had proved to be Gertie Westbrooke, whom everybody loved.

“And that’s what makes her sick, and why Mrs. Schuyler has gone to her. I see,—yes, I understand,” Mrs. Noall said, and though she had intended stopping to dinner with Mrs. Tiffe, she declared that she must go at once, and she went, and to my certain knowledge made twenty calls before ten o’clock at night, and told the story twenty times without varying it in the least.

Of course there was nothing more for me to do except to answer the questions of those who came on purpose to inquire if what they had heard was true. Never before had I received so many calls within a given time as I did during the few days of excitement when Hampstead was alive with the story, and reminiscences of the Fordhams were brought up and comments of various kinds were made, according to the nature of those who made them. I think Mrs. Barton from the Ridge was the 396most disturbed; she had spent the winter in Hampstead, and she came to see me early, and stayed three hours, and talked the matter over, and wished that it had not been made public.

Mrs. Barton was a kind, good woman at heart, but very proud and particular about family and blood, and I knew she was thinking of Tom, who still avowed his intention to marry Gertie or nobody, and so I flamed up in Edith’s defence, and said she was resolved to have no more concealments, that I had suggested to her the propriety of not telling who her first husband was, as that was sure to increase the talk and wonder.

“Mrs. Barton,” I continued, “you ought to have seen her then, and heard how piteously she cried as she said to me, ‘No, Ettie, I’ve thought that over, and talked it over with Col. Schuyler, who is willing for me to do as I like. To conceal it would look as if I was ashamed of Abelard, and I am not. He was my husband and I loved him, and Gertie and the world shall know who her father was.’”

“Noble woman!” Mrs. Barton exclaimed, crying a little herself. “I think she is right after all, and for one I shall stand by her.”

Everybody stood by her, though everybody talked and wondered and exclaimed, and suddenly remembered that they always thought there was something familiar in Mrs. Schuyler’s face and manner. Everybody, too, was anxious about Gertie, and the people cried on the Sunday when the prayer for the sick was read by our rector, Mr. Marks, whose voice trembled when he prayed for her. At last the one word “Better” flashed along the wires, and the boy from the office ran as he brought the telegram, telling everybody he met of the good news, and wiping his eyes on the sleeve of his coat as he handed the envelope to me, and said: “I guess she’ll pull ’er through.”

397
CHAPTER LX.
EDITH AND GERTIE.

hen Gertie wound her arms around Miss Rossiter’s neck and kissed her so lovingly, she touched a chord in the woman’s heart which had never been touched before,—a chord which, under favorable circumstances, would have vibrated with a mother’s love, and which now brought to life so strong a liking for the helpless girl, that had there been no Edith in the way, Miss Rossiter would have adopted her at once as her own petted daughter. During the days and nights they had watched together by Godfrey’s side, Gertie had crept a long way into Miss Rossiter’s heart by her quiet, gentle manner, and her kind, unselfish thoughtfulness for her companion’s comfort. More than once, when Miss Rossiter looked tired and worn, Gertie had made her lie down, and kneeling beside her had bathed and rubbed her head, and even her feet, and combed and brushed her hair, and had done it all as if it were a favor to herself rather than to her companion, whose duty it now was to care for her.

And Miss Rossiter did not shrink from the task imposed upon her. True, she wore a lump of camphor in her bosom to prevent infection, just as she had done in Godfrey’s room, and she occasionally swallowed a pill of morphine, and kept the house full of chloride of lime, and used every disinfectant of which she had ever heard, and hired a nurse to take care of Gertie, but stood by her all the same, and saw that the doctor’s orders were obeyed. The third day Col. Schuyler said to her, when he came to look at Gertie:

“Christine, you are doing nobly, and I thank you so much, but I must test you still further. Gertie’s mother ought to be here when her child is so sick. Are you willing I should send for her?”

“Certainly,” Miss Rossiter replied, with a little darker shade 398on her face. “Send for her by all means. I had thought of that myself.”

It was right, Miss Rossiter knew, that Edith should come to her sick daughter, and she gave her consent graciously, though there was in her heart a feeling of aversion to the woman who had taken Emily’s place, and whom she had always disliked. Still in her own house she must be polite and courteous, and she received Mrs. Schuyler kindly, and made her rest awhile and take some refreshment before she went to Gertie, who was sleeping and must not be disturbed.

“She would not know you, though she talks of you sometimes,” Miss Rossiter said, “and you must be careful not to excite her in the least.”

Edith promised to do whatever Miss Rossiter thought was proper.

“Only let me go to her at once,” she said. “You know I have not seen her in nineteen years, and she my own child, too.”

“Not seen her? What do you mean?” Miss Rossiter asked, a suspicion of Edith’s sanity crossing her mind.

“I mean I have not seen her, knowing she was my daughter,” Edith replied, as she followed to the room where Gertie lay so white and still, her bright hair tucked away beneath a silken net, a red fever spot on cheek and lips, and her hands folded upon her bosom just as she kept them for the most of the time while with Godfrey she went sailing over the golden sea to the country so far away.

She was on her journey thither when Edith came in, and, parting the curtains cautiously, stood looking at her, while in fancy she was a young girl again in the dreary room in Dorset Street, and the rain plashed against the windows, and ran down the panes in dirty streams, and the roar of the great city sounded in her ears, and she heard the lodgers’ steps upon the stairs, and her baby was in her arms, nestled so close to her that she felt the warm, tender flesh against her own, just as she felt that of the sick girl, whose face and neck, and hands she touched so carefully, and yet with such a world of love and tenderness, as she whispered to herself:

399“Little girley, little baby, little Gertie, my very own little one, you are changed since that dreadful day so many years ago, but I know that you are mine. They took you from me when I was asleep, and now, when I see you again, I find you sleeping too. Darling little child, do you know it is your mother standing here and talking to you thus? Will you ever know, ever open your eyes on me and call me mother? Oh, Father in Heaven, spare her to me,—spare my precious child!” This was what the colonel heard Edith say; for, feeling anxious for her, he stood just outside the door, and when her voice ceased and he heard a rustling sound, he went in, and, supporting her with his arm as she sank into a chair, held her head upon his bosom, and soothed her tenderly.

It was strange the effect Edith’s presence in the sick-room had upon Miss Rossiter. She had fully indorsed Gertie,—ay, had in some sort adopted her in her own mind, and could not bear that another should share her watch and care and anxiety for the only sick person in whom she had ever been so deeply interested. But as soon as Edith’s tears were dried, and she was herself again, the calm, quiet dignity of the mother asserted itself, and Miss Rossiter, who was not the mother, was compelled to stand aside while another took her place and did the thousand little things which only a mother could have thought to do.

And Edith did not grow tired with constant watching. On the contrary, both strength and flesh came back to her, and, when at last the fever turned, and she knew her child would live, she gained faster than Gertie, and it seemed to the colonel that she grew young and fair and smooth each day until it was very hard to believe her the mother of the sick girl, who, with the marks of disease upon her face, looked her nineteen years.

The sea was not so placid now, the boat was tossing on the waves, and Gertie sat alone on deck, and called in vain for Godfrey, who had deserted his post and was nowhere to be found, until one morning, when he came bodily, the wreck of his former self, and climbing the stairs to Gertie’s room, bent 400over her with words of love which penetrated to her dull ear, and must in part have been comprehended.

After that Godfrey stayed in Miss Rossiter’s house, which seemed a sort of hospital, and was so distasteful to Miss Julia, when at last she came from Florida, that she accepted her Uncle Calvert’s invitation, and went to the poky house on Washington Square, where the Sixth Avenue cars on one side, and the University on the other, nearly drove her wild with the never-ending tinkle of their bells.

Julia had heard every particular of the story before she came home, for her father had written it to her, and had told her of Gertie’s illness, and Edith’s presence in Miss Rossiter’s house. Thus her first surprise and indignation had had time to abate, and now she was in a kind of bewildered state, incapable of realizing anything to the full, except the fact that in some sort her aunt had gone over to the enemy, leaving her alone on the old vantage ground of dislike and opposition to that woman through whom all this had come upon them. Fortunately, however, for Julia, her mind was just then occupied with thoughts of a Southern bachelor, who had offered himself and his reputed half million for her acceptance. This offer she was duly considering when she came home, and after seeing how matters were at her Aunt Christine’s, and staying a day or two in the dark old house in Washington Square, she nearly made up her mind to accept it, though the man was forty and bored her nearly to death with his twaddling talk about his horses and dogs. She had not seen Edith during the one day and night spent at Miss Rossiter’s, neither had she mentioned her name or inquired for Gertie, except to ask if the fever was considered catching, and how her aunt liked having her house turned into a hospital! Of this indifference Edith knew nothing, and would not have cared if she had. All her thoughts were centred in that little, white-faced girl slowly groping her way back to life and reason, and talking now far more than she had done at first when the water was so still and the boat sailed so steadily. She was saved; she would live; there was no question about that, and Edith had only to wait patiently for the day when the 401blue eyes would first look at her with recognition in their glance, and the dear voice call her mother.

Miss Rossiter had given her Gertie’s message, and she knew the words by heart, and repeated them to herself as she watched for the first faint sign of reason. It was on a pleasant April day, and the windows of the room were open, and the sun shone softly upon the plants which Miss Rossiter had placed outside the windows, where they made quite a little garden.

Edith had been up all night, and was still sitting across the room, leaning her tired head upon her hand, when a sound caught her ear and brought her to her feet, where she stood listening intently, wondering if she could be mistaken, or had she heard the blessed name mother, and was she the mother meant and Gertie’s the voice which called her.

“Mother, my mother,” it came again, and then Edith glided across the floor, and parting the silken hangings to the bed looked eagerly in.

Gertie was awake, and sane, and thinking herself alone had tried to put things together and remember where she was, and what it was she heard long ago, which made her so glad.

“Oh, I know I have a mother,” she said to herself, and it was this word Edith caught.

“Mother, my mother,” Gertie said again, delighted to repeat the dear name, and then it was that Edith parted the curtains and looked in upon her.

Oh, the rapturous joy of that first long gaze when eye met eye, and told without the aid of words the mighty love there was between the mother and the child meeting as such for the first time in the full sense of the relation. My pen cannot describe it, neither should it if it could, for there are some scenes over which a vail must be thrown, and this is one of them. Suffice it to say that Edith was perfectly satisfied with Gertie’s reception of her, and when, an hour later, Colonel Schuyler looked into the room he found them fast asleep, both heads on the same pillow, Edith’s arms around Gertie’s neck, and one of Gertie’s pale, wan hands resting on Edith’s face. This picture touched the colonel, and he cried softly to himself as he stood gazing at 402the two, so like each other in their sleep that he wondered he had never seen the resemblance before. Then he called Miss Rossiter, who came and looked, and cried a little too; but neither spoke a word, and after a moment’s silence went out together, and closing the door left them alone together, the mother and her child.

CHAPTER LXI.
GODFREY AND GERTIE.

oward, come here, I wish to speak to you,” Miss Rossiter said, in the quick, decided way she had assumed since so much had been depending upon her, and she had been drawn out of herself. “Howard, what do you mean to do with Gertie? Will you make her really one of your children, and have her share equally with them?”

“Really, Christine, I have not thought; it’s a little too soon for that. Why, yes, I rather think—she will share with them,—yes, if Godfrey marries Alice, there would then be more reason why Gertie should share equally, as Godfrey would not need so much, and you know I have had some heavy losses.”

“Howard, don’t be a fool. Godfrey will never marry Alice, nor anybody else except Gertie Westbrooke, and you know that, or ought to know it. I learned it those days I took care of him when Gertie was with me, and I got to liking her in spite of myself. I am not a deceitful woman, Howard, and I will not say that I am altogether satisfied with Edith. It is not in my nature to feel that people of her rank in life are fully my equals, but I shall always treat her well for Gertie’s sake and Godfrey’s. I cannot understand it, but that child has grown strangely into my heart since she has been sick here in my house. They say we always love what has cost us trouble and made us forget ourselves, and I think I love her better than I have loved anything since Charlie died, and I intend to make her my heir, and if she only would stay with me I’d keep her so gladly. I have told you this, Howard, so that money need not 403stand between you and your consent for Godfrey to make Gertie his wife.”

Colonel Schuyler was astonished, and could hardly believe that it was Christine Rossiter speaking to him, as this woman spoke, and actually pleading Gertie’s cause, and advising him to accept her as the wife of his son. In spite of Miss Rossiter’s talk of adoption and heirship, he felt a pang of regret when he remembered the Creighton line of ancestry, almost as pure as his own, and thought of Jenny Nesbitt, who seemed destined to be connected with him in so many ways through Edith and Emma and Godfrey. But there was no help for it. The star of the Lyles was in the ascendant, and when, that afternoon, Godfrey went up to see Gertie for the first time since her return to consciousness, he had his father’s full consent to claim her for his wife.

The colonel himself had told Godfrey the story of Gertie’s birth, and Godfrey had hurrahed for very joy, feeling that in some way Gertie was thus brought nearer to him. He knew of her coming alone to him in his illness and braving the world because she thought herself his sister. He had faint reminiscences, too, of soft hands which cooled his burning brow, of loving words breathed into his ear, and of firm, though gentle remonstrances and threats of leaving him, when the vessel plunged so fearfully and he was plunging with it. Gertie had saved his life, and even when he did not know she was in the room she had been constantly in his mind, and was with him in his desperate voyage over the stormy sea, where he had so nearly been lost. Always, when the waves were doing their worst, there was a thought in his heart of La Sœur, and he wondered how she was coming through, and if the window was open in her dingy little stateroom. Hers was the first name upon his lips when he awoke to consciousness; and before he was really able he left his room and went to Miss Rossiter’s, to be near his darling and see her when he chose. But she had never known him when he bent over her with fond words and loving caresses; and she talked of him to his face, and mourned sadly that he was lost, and she was left to sail alone over the troubled waters.

“I am here, Gertie. I shall never leave you again,” he had 404said to her once, when she could not understand his meaning, and now he was going to say it again, with every obstacle cleared from his path, and nothing to impede his love.

Gertie was sitting up and expecting him, but she was not prepared for the impetuosity with which he gathered her in his arms, and hugging her so close that her breath came in quick gasps, carried her to the mirror, and laying her white, thin face beside his own, which, if possible, was whiter and thinner, bade her see what a “pair of picked chickens they were.”

“But we weathered it, Gertie,” he said, “and now we’ve nothing to do but grow strong and well again, and you will be more beautiful than ever, while I,—well, Gertie, I never was so happy in my life as at this moment when I hold you thus and kiss you, so—and so!”

He emphasized his words by kisses, which took Gertie’s breath away, and when she could speak she said imploringly, “Please, Godfrey, put me down. You tire, you hurt me.”

Then he placed her in her chair, and kneeling at her side, held her hands in his, and looking anxiously into her face, said, “Forgive me, darling, I did not think how weak you were, and I am so happy, for I have father’s consent for you to tell me yes. I really have, and you are my own forever. ‘Tell Gertie,’ father said, ‘that I release her from her promise and welcome her as my daughter.’ Will you kiss me now, Gertie, even if I am not a perfect gentleman?”

“You are not deceiving me, Godfrey?” Gertie said, her lips quivering as she thought how terrible it would be to have this new cup of joy dashed from her lips just as she was ready to drink it.

“Deceiving you! No. Father did say so, and Allie knows it, too; and fickle, like all her sex, will not break her heart for me, who, she says, look like a fright with my shaved head, and high cheek-bones, and loose clothes. You see the fever has not left me very good-looking, and Marks, the rector at Hampstead, is down at Uncle Calvert’s, and rode with Allie yesterday; and I should not be surprised if she were yet to make aprons for Mrs. Van’s babies, and carry soup to the old lady. She’ll be a splendid wife for a minister, if she makes up her mind to it.”

405He had rattled on thus volubly for the sake of giving Gertie time in which to recover herself, and when he saw that her breath came more naturally and the color was dying away from her cheeks, he returned to the matter in question.

“Kiss me, Gertie, gentleman or not, and I shall know you are my wife.”

He held his face close to hers, and Gertie put her arms around his neck, and so they were betrothed at last; and when, half an hour later, Edith came in, she found Gertie with her head resting on Godfrey’s arm and an expression of perfect peace upon her face, while he talked to her in tones which no one who had ever known experimentally the meaning of love could mistake.

“Ah, mother!” he said, as Edith came up to him. “You are really my mother now, for Gertie is mine, and the Lyles are pretty well mixed with the Schuylers, I think.”

How happy he was, and how he hovered around Gertie, seeming almost to devour her with his eyes when his lips were not meeting hers, and when he told Miss Rossiter the good news, he kissed her, too, and swung her round as if she had been a top, and wanted to kiss his father, and did kiss Julia and Alice both when he went to call upon them that evening, and told them he was as good as a married man.

Alice had given him up since the day Miss Rossiter drove down to see her, and talked so affectionately of Gertie, and said nothing would please her better than to see her Godfrey’s wife. There had been a few tears in private, a wrench or two in her heart, and then it was all over; for Allie’s love had never been very strong, and but little more than her pride was wounded when Gertie was preferred to herself. Alice had one good trait,—she did not long harbor malice or resentment; and she received Godfrey cordially, and said she hoped he would be happy, and blushed rather prettily when he joked her about the parson, and said she might possibly be his neighbor in Hampstead.

Two weeks from that day the doors and windows at Schuyler Hill were opened wide, and Mrs. Tiffe, in a wild state of excitement and expectancy, was giving the most contradictory orders to the servants, and flitting from room to room to see 406that all was in readiness for the family, who were coming home and would be there to dinner. Everybody in Hampstead knew the story now, and none liked Edith the less, but rather the more, I think; while the fact that Gertie was to marry Godfrey filled every one with joy, except Tom Barton, who came to the Hill the day we were expecting her, and, handing me a bunch of pansies and English violets, said:

“They are for her room. I always associate her with English violets. She is just as sweet as they are, Heaven bless her!”

There was a tremor in his voice and his hand shook as he gave me the flowers. He was taking it hard, and I pitied him so much when he said:

“There is nothing in the wide world for me to live for now; but I shall not go back to my cups. She helped make me a man, and I’ll keep so for her sake; but I tell you, Ettie, it is pretty tough sledding, and there is a lump in my heart as big as a bass drum. I wish I were dead; I do, upon my word.”

How sweet the perfume of those violets was, and how eagerly Gertie inhaled it when she came at last, and I took her to her room.

“Tom brought them. He says they are like you,” I said, while a shadow flitted over Gertie’s face, for she knew just how much Tom Barton loved her, and felt in part the burden weighing him down so heavily.

It was curious to watch Edith as she came back to her home, with something of humility and fear in her manner, as if she dreaded the meeting of her old acquaintance now that they knew of the deception which had been practised so long, and it was equally curious to see how the colonel sustained and upheld her, and stood by her, and treated her with a consideration and increased deference and tenderness which would have precluded anything like coolness or indifference on the part of his friends toward his wife had they felt disposed to manifest it, which they were not. Edith was too popular; too much a favorite with all classes at Hampstead for anything except positive wrong to make a difference now; and the very first evening of her return many of her old acquaintances came to see her and offer their congratulations for the finding of her daughter, and that daughter Gertie.

407How happy we were that night when Edith and Gertie sat together upon the sofa, the daughter’s head resting upon the mother’s shoulder, and the colonel and Godfrey standing behind and bending protectingly over them. Even Julia, who had come with the party, was unusually gracious, and told me confidentially that though she would have advised secrecy with regard to Gertie’s father, she was tolerably well satisfied with matters as they were, especially as Major Camden did not care, and she should soon be away from it all.

The next day was Sunday, and Mr. Marks had no cause to complain of empty pews, for every place was filled long before the bell sounded its last note and the Schuyler carriage drew up before the door. It did not matter that the villagers had seen Edith and Gertie and Godfrey hundreds of times, there was about them now a new element of interest, and the people came from other churches to see the wonderful sight. But they were in part doomed to disappointment, for Gertie was still too weak to venture out, while Godfrey would not go without her, and so, only Edith was there, her beautiful head drooping a little, and her eyes cast timidly down as she walked to her accustomed place and dropped upon her knees, where she remained a long, long time, while all through the church there was a solemn hush as the people watched her, many with tearful eyes, and all with a feeling that they knew the nature of her prayers and sympathized with her.

CHAPTER LXII.
THE WEDDING.

t took place early in October, on the morning when I commenced this story; and when from my chamber-window I saw the bridal train go by, and heard the pealing of the merry marriage-bells, and the shouting of the children from the mission-school, who strewed the bride’s path from the carriage to the church with flowers, and to whom Godfrey 408promised a fête upon the lawn, with all the candy and ice-cream they could eat, when he returned from his journey. Never before, nor since, was the church so full as it was that lovely October morning, when the maples were turning scarlet, and the walnut trees were golden in the autumnal sunshine, which fell so softly and warmly, as if in blessing, on the beautiful young bride and the perfectly happy groom.

There was a trip to the West as far as Denver, and then one day in November, the bridal pair came back to Hampstead, where the bells rang merrily in honor of their return; and the boys of the mission-school, remembering the promised candy and ice-cream, made a bonfire in the street, and hurrahed lustily for Mr. Godfrey Schuyler, and a tiger, too!

They had their fête, and candy and cream, and ate it in the November rain; but not until after the grand party at the Hill, which, for elegance and expenditure, far outdid the one given a few years before, when Edith was the bride, and Gertie the little unknown girl, watching the ladies as they came, and wishing that she was one of them.

She was one of them now, or rather the one around whom everything else centred, and I never saw a creature so dazzlingly beautiful as she was in her bridal robes, when, with Godfrey at her side, she stood to receive the guests. Everybody who had been bidden was there,—except the Bartons, from whom there came a note of regret, saying that “sudden and severe illness in the family would keep them at home.”

“Who can it be? Not Rosamond, for she wrote the regret,” Gertie said; and then, as her eyes met mine, we both thought of Tom, who had never been seen in town since the morning of Gertie’s bridal.

He was present at the ceremony and stood where he could look in Gertie’s face, and it was said by those who watched him that at the words, “I, Gertrude, take thee, Godfrey, to be my wedded husband,” he put up his hand and started as if smitten heavily. He came to me after it was over, and said, in a half-laughing, half-serious way, that there was a feeling in his stomach as if a hornet’s nest had been stirred up, and each individual hornet 409was doing its best to sting him! I know Gertie thought of him many times that night when she moved a queen amid the brilliant throng, where only one vied with her at all in point of loveliness, and that one, her mother, who, with every shadow lifted from her heart, seemed to have recovered all the beauty of her early womanhood. Edith’s dress was a heavy silk of a creamy tint, with overskirt and bertha of soft, rich lace, while at Gertie’s request she wore her hair in curls, arranged at the back of her head, and held by a coral comb. Coral was very becoming to Edith, and she looked so young and handsome that none would ever have dreamed that she was mother to the bride. They were like two sisters, and the colonel might have passed for the father of them both. He seemed very proud of Edith, and in his eyes, which followed her constantly, there was a world of love and tenderness, which told how dear she was to him, even now that everything pertaining to her early life was known to him and the world.

Later in the evening, when the dancing began to flag a little, and the New York belles had one after another tried Gertie’s new Steinway, Edith was persuaded to take her seat at the piano.

“Give us one of those sweet, plaintive little airs you sang at Oakwood,” Godfrey said, as he bent over her.

Edith had never tried so much as a single note since the day when she learned from her mother that her daughter was alive, but something told her she could sing now, for the iron fingers were gone forever; and selecting a German song, which a year before would have been far beyond her power, she began to sing,—her voice, which had once been so rich, and full, and strong, gathering strength, and depth, and power as she progressed, and soaring up, and up, and up, ever clear, ever sweet, ever ringing, until the whole house was full of melody, and the guests came flocking in to hear.

“Edith, my darling,” and “mamma, mamma,” were said in the same breath of astonishment as the music ceased, and Gertie and the colonel laid a hand on Edith’s shoulder. “I never dreamed you had a voice like that. I am prouder of you to-night than ever I was before,” the colonel said, as at a sign 410from Edith, who was looking very white, he led her away from the piano and out upon a balcony, where she stood a moment to recover herself, and force down the rapid beating of her heart ere she told him why she could not sing before, and that with the confession of everything, and the finding of Gertie, her glorious voice had come back to her again.

CHAPTER LXIII.
MARY ROGERS’ LETTER TO EDITH.

ive days after the bridal party at Schuyler Hill Edith and Gertie sat together in the boudoir of the latter talking of the Providence which had thrown them so constantly together, and of the way in which they were at last made known to each other.

“I have often thought of the night Mrs. Rogers died,” Edith said, “and I think there must have been something on her mind which she wished to tell me about you. Do you suppose she could have known you were my child?”

“No, she could not have kept it so many years,” Gertie said, “and yet I can remember many things she used to say about my parentage, which I interpret differently now from what I did when my thoughts were all in another channel.”

“One would have supposed that knowing as she must have known her liability to sudden death she would have left some writing which might throw light upon your history. You are sure she did not?” Edith said, and Gertie replied:

“Yes, sure; or at least I think I am. Norah and I looked over everything carefully at the time, and there was nothing but a bundle of old letters and receipts.”

“Did you destroy them?” Edith asked, and Gertie answered her:

“No, I have them still in the box where I keep the souvenirs of my childhood. I’ll bring them, if you like, though I am quite sure that there is nothing in them.”

The box was brought and opened, and Gertie began to examine 411the papers more carefully than ever before. There were dressmakers’ bills and grocers’ bills and landlords’ bills, and music bills for Gertie and letters to “John Rogers, Birmingham,” and then Gertie came upon a fresher-looking envelope, the seal of which had not been broken, and on which, in Mary Rogers’ hand, was written: “For Mrs. Edith Schuyler, if I die suddenly.”

“Oh-h—yes—here—it must be this?” Gertie gasped, as she passed the package to Edith, whose heart beat with an undefined dread lest after all there might be some mistake and her darling be wrested from her.

“Shall I read it, or you?” she said, and Gertie replied: “You;—but read aloud, if you please. I cannot wait to know.”

Edith could not read it aloud, and Gertie did not wait, but leaning over her mother’s shoulder read the letter with her. It was as follows:

“Hampstead, April 10, 18—.
“Mrs. Col. Schuyler—Madame: Warned by a twinge in my heart and about my vitals that I may be taken away suddenly, I am going to commit to paper the true history of Gertrude Westbrooke, the girl known as my adopted child. Mrs. Schuyler, did you ever hear of a young girl,—who came one day with her mother to a dreary lodging in Dorset Street, London? They had the back rooms looking into a dirty court, and the girl had a baby born there, a little girl baby, with eyes like robin’s eggs.

“There was a housemaid, who waited on the ladies in No. ——; her name was Mary Stover, and she admired the young lady so much, and was curious about her, especially after the birth of the baby. That housemaid was me, and the lady was you, whom your mother called Heloise. She was Mrs. Fordham then, and I did not like her much, and after I accidentally heard what she said to you about sending the child away, I kept a watch on her.

“I was going to your room with a jug of water, and heard it all, and saw her the night she went out with a bundle under her 412arm. I was sure the bundle was the baby, and, when she got back, I let myself out on to that little balcony under your window, and waited till I heard her tell you where she had taken the child. There certainly was a Providence in it that I had a sister nurse in that very hospital, and, to make sure your mother told you true, I got leave to go next day to see my sister.

“By a little management, I found that a girl baby had been left there the night before, with Heloise pinned on its dress, as Mrs. Fordham said, and that it was further marked on the bosom with a drop of blood. I got Anne to show the baby to me and knew it for the same I had seen in your room. You remember I tended it an hour or more once.

“I love children, and this one interested me more than I can tell; and I said to myself I’ll keep watch of it, and the mother, too, and some time maybe I can unravel the mystery and bring them together. From what I overheard, I believed you had been married, and that your husband was dead, and that was all I knew of him. But I pitied you, and loved the child, and without telling Anne why, I made her promise to be very kind to the little one.

“Mother lived in Dorset Street, too, and as she was very lonesome from week’s end to week’s end without us, I took the plan to have her take the baby for ours. It was hard work to bring her to it, and Anne opposed it, too; but something seemed to push me on and say that it must be done, and I got her consent, and she took Heloise to our house in No. ——, where she was just like a little sunbeam, and it was hard to tell which loved her the most, mother, or Anne, or me. I claimed her for mine, and dressed her with my wages, and meant to bring her up above what we were, if I could. When you left Dorset Street I lost track of you for a while, but that only made me love baby more. Soon after you left I got another place, and a better one. I was waiting-maid to a Mrs. Westbrooke, who lived in a very fine place. She, too, had a baby girl named Gertrude, and, when it died suddenly of croup, I thought she would have mourned herself to death for it.

“About that time mother went off with cholera, and then I 413told Mrs. Westbrooke about my baby, and asked if I might bring it and show it to her. You don’t know how pretty she was, with her golden-red hair curling all over her head, and her sweet blue eyes. My lady got very fond of her the three days she stayed with me, and, when I spoke of carrying it away, she said:

“‘I do not believe I can let baby go. It seems like my own lost darling. Will you let me have her?’

“‘For your own?’ I said, and she answered:

“‘Yes, for my own.’

“This was just what suited me,—to see my pet grow up a lady,—and I told her yes, and as the master did not oppose it more than to say ‘that he did not care especially for other people’s brats, and this one must be kept out of his way,’ it was settled that baby should stay, and I do believe my mistress came to love it like her own. She gave it her lost baby’s name, and had it christened ‘Gertrude Heloise Westbrooke,’ so it sure would have a name. She was a sweet-tempered lady, but weak and nervous like. I think she had consumption, for nothing in particular appeared to ail her, only she was tired like all the time, and never could sleep nor get rested, and at last she died, and left an annuity of forty pounds a year to little Gertie, and said I was to have the care of her.

“About a year after her death the master married a fashionable, fussy little woman from Glasgow, who disliked children worse than he did, and never noticed Gertie in any way after she found out that she was not Mr. Westbrooke’s own. I was about to be married myself, and asked the master if I might have the child. He was more than willing, and so I took her to my own comfortable home on the second floor of a house in what is now Abingdon Road, but was then Newland Street. All this time I had not been able to track you, though I never went out that I did not look for you; and many’s the time I drew my little girl to the gardens of Kensington and even to Hyde Park, where I sat by the hour watching the people as they went by in hopes of seeing you. But I never did, and I had almost given it up, when one day in October I went into a linendraper’s 414on High Street to get a new slip for my darling. The girls were all very busy, and I had to wait a bit, and was looking at the dresses in the window when I heard some one say, ‘Isn’t she beautiful?’ and looking up I saw you coming in. I knew you in a moment, though you was handsomer than ever, and looking well and strong. In my excitement I forgot what I had come to get, but stood watching you, my heart beating so loud I was afraid you might hear it.

“I do not remember what you bought, but you ordered it sent to ‘Mrs. Dr. Barrett’s, No. —— Caledonia Street,’ and then left the shop, while I followed close behind. You turned into that shady lane or road which leads past the Holland House to Bayswater, and I kept as near you as I could without attracting your attention. Once you sat down under a tree as if you were tired, and going a little further on I sat down too, and watched you when you did not know it. There was a pretty little girl about Gertie’s age playing near, and I remember you called her to you, and smoothed her curls, and caressed her little hands, and asked her for her name, and when she went back to her nurse there was a sad, sorry look in your eyes and, on your face, and I said to myself, ‘Is she thinking of the baby, I wonder?’

“I knew from Anne that a woman in deep black, with her vail drawn closely over her face had been to the hospital to inquire after it, and had seemed relieved when told it had been taken by a woman who was sure to be kind to it. I was certain the lady in black was your mother, but could not tell whether she had ever inquired again for the child. I meant to know for sure where you lived, and if Caledonia Street was your home; so when you got up, which you did after a time, I got up too, and kept close behind till you reached Notting Hill station. I was standing by you when you got your ticket, and took the same carriage you did, and alighting at the same station, followed you to your very door, and saw you go in like one who was at home. There was a baker’s shop near by, and I bought some bread and buns which I did not want, and questioned the girl who waited upon me with regard to the houses in the neighborhood, 415pretending I was looking for one to rent. In this way I learned that the Mrs. Dr. Barrett who lived at No. —— took lodgers, and had a beautiful daughter, a Miss Lyle, the child of a first marriage, the girl supposed, as old Dr. Barrett, who had owned the place for a long time, had only been married to the present Mrs. Barrett two or three years when he died. So much I learned, and then I left the place for home, determining to keep track of you after that, and not lose sight of you again. I knew when you were governess at Allanbanke, and when you played the organ in —— church, and used sometimes on Sundays to take Gertie there to listen to the music, but never gave her a hint as to who the musician was. There was a kind of pleasant excitement in watching you and feeling that I had your secret, and I enjoyed it to the full.

“At last you were lost to me for a while,—I nursed my husband in his last sickness, but greatly to my delight you unexpectedly turned up again at the very house where my cousin Norah was living as lady’s maid,—at Oakwood, you know. I saw you there one evening when I was calling on Norah, and learned that you were Mrs. Sinclair’s companion, and was going abroad with her. As Norah, too, was to go with her mistress, I was certain to know when you returned, and I did, and saw you dressed for dinner one day, and thought you the most beautiful woman I ever saw. I was a widow then. My husband had been dead some time, but he had left me quite comfortable for a woman of my class, while Gertie’s annuity was sufficient for her. I was anxious that she should have a good education, and I tried to bring her up a lady so far as I knew myself. Just what I intended to do, or whether I should ever let you know of her existence, had now become a matter of some doubt, for I loved the girl too well to part with her willingly. She was the very apple of my eye, and I said unless something happens to me, or her mother marries rich, I will keep the secret all my life. Still I liked to be near you,—to know just what you were doing, and so I applied to your mother for apartments, with what success you know. Then Colonel Schuyler came, and Norah told me of your probable 416marriage with him, and I had a great battle with duty and my love for little Gertie. The first told me that when you was in a position to do for the child what I never could, I ought to give her up, while the last said I never could; she was all the world to me, and I decided to keep her a spell at least, especially as through Norah it was so arranged that I was to go to America when you did. In any event I should have followed you after a while, and I thought it a special Providence which made my going with you so easy. You can imagine the interest I have felt in you and everything belonging to you, and how at times, when I saw my darling snubbed by the young ladies at the Hill, I have been tempted to claim her right to be there as their equal and companion.

“I never could tell whether Colonel Schuyler knew that such a child ever had existence. If he did not, and your passing for Miss Lyle instead of Mrs. made me suspect that he did not, I thought it would be a cruel thing for me to tell it to him, and that of itself might have kept me from it, even if I had loved Gertie less. If it was not for this frequent pain which warns me of sudden death, I should perhaps keep the secret forever; but I must not leave my little girl alone if anything happens to me, and so I write it down, begging you to take her and do justice to her, for I swear to Heaven she is the child born in Dorset Street, Jan. ——, 18—, of the young woman Heloise or Edith Lyle, whose mother called herself Mrs. Fordham, and left the baby on the steps of the —— Street Hospital.

“Perhaps you need not confess the truth to your husband, if he does not already know it, but you can at least adopt Gertie, and treat her as your own, and this I beg of you to do.

“And now I have told you all I know. Who Gertie’s father was, or where he died, is a secret to me; only this is sure, the girl known as Gertie Westbrooke is your own daughter, and may God deal with you and prosper you according as you deal with her when I am gone.

“Written this day at Hampstead, and sworn to solemnly by me before the Eye which sees me, and which knows what I say is true.

Mary Rogers.”
417Had Edith needed proof of Gertie’s identity, she had it in this letter, but she did not, and clasping the beautiful girl in her arms, she burst into a paroxysm of tears, moaning softly, “My darling, my baby; it seems like a dream, and God has been so good to keep you all the time and bring you at last to me. Oh, if mother could have known! She loved you from the time you went to lodge with her in London.”

“Mamma,” Gertie said suddenly, “she did know! I am sure of it, or she must have guessed. It was the night she died, when I was sitting with her, and accidentally mentioned my birthmark,—that drop of blood. I remember how excited she grew, and how hard she tried to tell me something, but could not. It must have been her suspicion of the truth.”

“Perhaps so. I would like to believe she knew it,” Edith answered, and then she told her daughter of the Lyles across the sea in Alnwick; the sweet-faced old lady, and the barearmed Jenny, who had so shocked and disgusted her. Gertie was interested in the grandmother at once, and proposed writing to her immediately, and telling her that the son whom she had mourned so long had left a child who would some day find her in her humble home, and call her grandmamma.

This plan Edith did not oppose, but before Gertie could write there came a letter from Robert Macpherson, saying that Mrs. Lyle was dead and the cottage vacant, for Mr. Nesbit had taken his wife and children to the north of Scotland, where his boyhood was passed. As Gertie had no particular interest in Jenny, her letter was not written, but through her influence provision was made for the education of Jennie’s children, especially the boy, who bore Godfrey’s name.

418
CHAPTER LXIV.,
AND LAST.

he Schuylers all remained in Hampstead the winter after Gertie’s marriage, and our little town was the pleasanter and gayer for it. Only one sad thing occurred,—and that, the death of poor Tom, which took place about Christmas time, when we were hanging our garlands of evergreens in the church and making ready for our annual festival. I was sitting by Gertie working upon the same wreath, when the news was brought to us, and I saw the tears, which came with a rush to her eyes, and knew she was thinking of the hopeless love which had, no doubt, shortened poor Tom’s life.

“Tell Gertie,” he said to his sister, when the death-sweat was on his brow, and his utterance was thick and indistinct; “tell Gertie I loved her till the last, and blessed her with my dying breath, for she helped make me a man. But for her I should fill a drunkard’s grave and meet a drunkard’s doom. She warned me of my peril; she led me back from the brink of ruin; and if I am saved, as I hope to be, I shall be a star in her crown of glory, as the sinner whom she converted from his evil ways. Heaven bless her, and Godfrey, too; they are worthy of each other.”

These were Tom’s last words, and Gertie cried as if her heart would break when Rosamond repeated them to her the week after Tom’s funeral when she came to say good-by. They were going away from the Ridge House, Rosamond said, and the place was for sale. She wished Godfrey would buy it; she would rather see him and Gertie there than strangers, who had never known or cared for her and her mother.

The idea of a home of her own was a pleasant one to Gertie, and a few days after Godfrey rode up to the Ridge to confer with Mrs. Barton. But another had been before him and bought the place, and some time in February was to take possession.

Godfrey’s horse never galloped a distance of two miles and 419a half more swiftly than on that day when his rider was charged with so important news.

“Gertie, Gertie, I say, where are you? Look here!” he exclaimed, as he bolted into the room where she was sitting. “Guess how the rector proposes to keep Lent! What cross is he going to bear!”

Gertie could only look at him in surprise, while he went on:

“He has bought the Ridge House, and is going to take a wife, just before Ash-Wednesday! Think of Alice Creighton running a sewing society and having a church sociable!”

It was as Godfrey said, Alice was to be Rev. Mrs. Marks, and live at the Ridge House, which her money bought, and the fitting up of which she came to superintend a few days after the story was out. She had written to me asking permission to stop with us while she remained in Hampstead, and I was expecting the little lady, when both Gertie and Godfrey interfered, and begged so hard for her to stop with them that she yielded to their entreaties and went to Schuyler Hill, where Godfrey nearly teased her life out of her, and was far more attentive to her than he had been during the short period of his engagement. Even Mr. Marks himself was scarcely more interested than Godfrey in the house, which Alice furnished in accordance with her own extravagant notions.

“It was not as if she was poor and dependent upon her husband’s salary,” she said, and so she made a little palace of a home for her future lord, who assented to whatever she suggested, and seemed so excited and absent-minded after she was gone, that we were glad when toward the last of February a young student from New York came up to officiate at St. Luke’s while the rector took a short vacation.

He was absent nearly two weeks,—and when he came back to us Alice was with him, and astonished us all with her wonderful outfit, her tall ruffs which reached to her ears, dresses which trailed a yard, sleeveless jackets of every device and color, and her hair, gotten up in a most remarkable manner. She said that she married Mr. Marks, and not his people, consequently nothing more must be expected of her as Mrs. Marks than she 420had been willing to render as Miss Creighton. But Alice was fond of “running things,” as Godfrey called it, and she had not been with us a month before she was head and front of the sewing-school for the poor children, and first manager of the Church Home, and secretary of the temperance club for the young men of the working class, and had established a reading room which she controlled entirely. Indeed she seemed in a fair way to revolutionize the town; and though she never approached to anything like familiarity with her husband’s parishioners, she was far more popular and better liked as Mrs. Marks than she had been as Alice Creighton, and when at the Easter festival several children were baptized three of them took her name, Alice Creighton Marks!

Some time in March there was another wedding at the Hill and Julia was the bride. She had accepted Major Camden, and started at once for his home among the pines of Carolina. All that spring and the ensuing summer Godfrey and Gertie stayed at Schuyler Hill, and when the autumn came they went down to New York and took possession of the handsome house which Miss Rossiter had bought and the colonel furnished for them.

It is very lonely and quiet now at Schuyler Hill, but Edith goes often to New York to visit Gertie in her beautiful home, where Miss Rossiter spends more than half her time, and where there is to be a family reunion when the Centennial guns are firing in honor of our nation’s hundredth birthday. Julia is coming from the south, and Robert and Emma from over the sea, and with them the little Highland lady they have named Edith Lyle, and so I finish the story commenced more than a year ago, when the October haze was on the hills and the music of marriage bells was sounding in my ears.

Esther Olivia Armstrong.
THE END.
TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES
Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in spelling.
Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDITH LYLE ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Lord Lister No. 0301: Het einde van een schrikbewind
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
Title: Lord Lister No. 0301: Het einde van een schrikbewind

Author: Theo von Blankensee

Author: Felix Hageman

Author: Kurt Matull

Release date: May 19, 2023 [eBook #70807]

Language: Dutch

Original publication: Netherlands: Roman- Boek- en Kunsthandel, 1910

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net/

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LORD LISTER NO. 0301: HET EINDE VAN EEN SCHRIKBEWIND ***
[Inhoud]
Oorspronkelijke voorkant.
[1]

[Inhoud]
☞ Elke aflevering bevat een volledig verhaal. ☜

UITGAVE VAN DEN ROMAN-, BOEK- EN KUNSTHANDEL—SINGEL 236,—AMSTERDAM.

[Inhoud]
Het einde van een Schrikbewind.
Het einde van een Schrikbewind.
HOOFDSTUK I.
Wie is de Moloch?
John Raffles alias Lord Lister, de gentleman-inbreker, bevond zich nog steeds te New-York, want het geheim van de bende van Het Kwade Oog hield nog steeds al zijn aandacht gevangen.

Reeds verscheidene weken geleden was hij, vergezeld door zijn trouwen vriend Charly Brand en den chauffeur Henderson, die hem eveneens in menig gevaarlijk avontuur trouw ter zijde had gestaan, naar de Vereenigde Staten gekomen.

En dat niet langs den gewonen weg, maar met het meest moderne voertuig, de vliegmachine.

Het was de „Duivel der Lucht”, ontsproten aan het geniale brein van den Grooten Onbekende, die de drie mannen had overgebracht, in iets minder dan tien uren.

Wat had Raffles wel kunnen bewegen, den nog altijd gevaarlijken overtocht te volbrengen?

Niets anders dan zijn zucht naar avonturen—en dan ook zijn behoefte om den strijd voort te zetten met den man, dien hij als zijn doodsvijand beschouwen moest, den aanvoerder van het wijdvertakte misdadigersgenootschap, dat van den Gouden Sleutel.

De naam van dezen man was Dokter Fox, en hij was op zijn beurt naar Amerika gegaan, ten einde daar door eigen aanschouwing zich een denkbeeld te vormen van de wijze waarop de bende van Het Kwade Oog optrad.

Slechts een paar maanden geleden was deze bende gesticht, en in dat korte tijdsverloop had zij schrik en angst weten te verspreiden door haar meedoogenlooze wreedheid, de geheimzinnigheid waarmede zij te werk ging, de onafwendbaarheid van haar vonnissen, en haar groot aantal leden.

Maar ook Raffles was spoedig in aanraking gekomen met deze vreeselijke bende en dat op eene wijze, welke voor de bandieten zeer ernstige gevolgen had—binnen enkele weken waren er eenige dozijnen leden in gevechten met de politie gedood, gewond, of gevangen genomen.

En dit alles was geschied door toedoen van John Raffles.

De oorsprong van zijn bemoeiingen lag in de omstandigheid dat de Bende van het Kwade Oog aan een der rijkste inwoners van de stad, den staalfabrikant Peter Vandyke, den eisch had gesteld om een ontzaglijke groote som, niet minder dan vijf millioen dollar, op een bepaalde plaats te deponeeren.

Dit geheele plan was in duigen gevallen toen Raffles [2]er zich mede bemoeide, en hij zelf was met een groot deel van den buit gaan strijken.

Daarna had hij nog menig gevaarlijk avontuur beleefd, en na eenigen tijd had het den schijn alsof de bende zoo goed als vernietigd was toen bijna alle luitenants van den aanvoerder, op slechts weinigen na, in handen der politie vielen, alweder door toedoen van Raffles.

Maar de inwoners van New-York hadden te vroeg gejuicht.

Want de vreeselijke bende leek niet in den wortel te zijn aangetast, de geheimzinnige aanvoerder, die door zijn volgelingen „De Moloch” werd geheeten, was en bleef onvindbaar.

Door een toevalligen samenloop van omstandigheden was Raffles er, een paar dagen voor de gebeurtenissen welke wij thans zullen beschrijven, bijna in geslaagd, het geheim te doorgronden, het geheim van den Moloch.

Maar door een onvoorzichtigheid liep hij in een val, en het was slechts te danken aan de stoutmoedigheid van Charly Brand en Henderson dat hij bevrijd werd uit de cel, waarin de geheimzinnige aanvoerder hem had doen opsluiten, na hem te hebben verklaard dat hij niet meer dan vier en twintig uren zou krijgen om te bewijzen dat hij inderdaad de man was voor wien hij zich te New-York had uitgegeven, namelijk Willem van den Heuvel, een Nederlandsch staalhandelaar, die zaken kwam doen met Peter Vandyke.

Daar Raffles dat onmogelijk zou hebben kunnen aantoonen, en een enkel telegram aan den Amerikaanschen consul-generaal in Nederland voldoende zou zijn geweest, om het bedrog aan den dag te brengen, wist Raffles wel dat de dood hem wachtte, en hij zou waarschijnlijk reeds niet meer tot de levenden behooren als Charly en Henderson, om den terriër Busto niet te vergeten, hem niet ter hulp waren gekomen.

En zoo was Raffles dus weder in vrijheid, in ervaring rijker, maar nog steeds in het onzekere verkeerend, wat betreft de identiteit van den Moloch.

Zeker, hij was bij dit vreeselijke wezen in een vertrek geweest—maar hij was gebonden, en van het bendehoofd gescheiden door een gazen scherm. De Moloch zat in het donker—, hij zelf daarentegen stond in het volle licht. En van den geheimzinnigen bandiet had hij dus niets anders kunnen waarnemen dan zijn eigenaardige oogen en blijkbaar met opzet veranderde stem.

Het was omstreeks zeven uur in den morgen, toen Raffles en zijn beide makkers zich bevonden in de eenvoudig gemeubelde kamer van een huis in een der volksbuurten.

In deze woning hadden zij eenigen tijd vertoefd onder het mom van vertalers en copiisten, en Henderson had er gewoond gedurende den tijd, dat de zoogenaamde Willem van den Heuvel en zijn secretaris, welke rol door Charly Brand vervuld werd, in het Washington Hotel hadden gelogeerd.

Busto, de moedige terriër van Raffles, lag aan de voeten van zijn meester en scheen er innig over verheugd te zijn, dat hij hem zulk een grooten dienst had kunnen bewijzen.

Raffles had Charly en Henderson de hand toegestoken en zeide nu met een klank in zijn stem, die er slechts zelden in te hooren was:

—Zonder jullie, mijn vrienden, zou mijn lot beslist zijn geweest, en zou de aanvoerder van de bende van Het Kwade Oog mij stellig ter dood laten brengen, want hij kent geen medelijden voor iemand, die hem in den weg staat.

De oogen van Charly Brand schemerden vochtig, toen hij met trillende stem antwoordde:

—Ik dank den Hemel, Edward, dat wij Busto hebben medegenomen, want ik twijfel er aan, of wij zonder hem je verblijfplaats wel zouden hebben ontdekt!

—Ja, de hond heeft zich dapper gedragen! hernam Raffles, terwijl hij het fraaie dier over den kop streelde, hij heeft den hond van den Moloch zijn tanden laten voelen, en hem verscheurd! Apropos—herinnerd jullie je nog, hoe dat dier er uit zag? Dat zou wel eens een kostbare aanwijzing kunnen zijn!

—De hond was gitzwart, met wollig haar, op den kop na, die rood was met een zwart masker! antwoordde Charly onmiddellijk.

—Een vreemde combinatie—een zwart lichaam met een rooden kop, zeide Raffles hoofdschuddend, welk ras had de hond?

—Dat zou ik je waarlijk niet kunnen zeggen, antwoordde Charly, het dier had de grootte en den vorm van een Duitschen staanden hond, of ook wel van een Aire Dale Terriër—maar het haar geleek wel dat van een poedel of van een krulharigen Herdershond, een Rotweiler bijvoorbeeld.

—Het dier was daar zeker in den kelder van het huis, waar ik gevangen zat, vastgemaakt, om alarm te maken en indringers tegen te houden, zeide Raffles nadenkend.

—Is het niet mogelijk, Mylord, dat de hond aan [3]een ander dan aan den Moloch toebehoort? vroeg Henderson nu.

—Neen, mijn vriend, dat komt mij niet waarschijnlijk voor, antwoordde Raffles; geen van de tien mannen die daar waren, en die een soort rechtbank samenstelden, zou het gewaagd hebben op eigen gezag een hond mede te brengen.

—Wat ben je nu eigenlijk van plan, Edward? vroeg Charly. Wordt het niet tijd om maar eens naar Londen terug te keeren, begin je niet genoeg van New-York te krijgen?

Raffles keek Charly strak aan, schudde het hoofd, en antwoordde:

—Teruggaan? Op dit oogenblik? Dat kan je geen ernst zijn! Ik ben in handen geweest van den Moloch, en ik zou mijn pogingen om hem te ontdekken opgeven? Nooit! De bende is nog niet vernietigd, zoolang de Moloch aan het hoofd er van staat—en ik wil en zal ontdekken wie hij is!

—Maar je hebt volstrekt geen aanknoopingspunt, Edward! riep Charly uit.

—Daarin vergis je je, mijn waarde, wij hebben integendeel een zeer kostbaar aanknoopingspunt—de lucht van den bandiet! Busto heeft een klein stuk geroken van de zwart gazen kap, welke het bendehoofd steeds schijnt te dragen als hij met zijn luitenants confereert—ik heb dat stukje gaas nog altijd en Busto heeft een goeden neus!

—Het is zeker, dat hij in het Central Park op een auto is toegevlogen, die ons voorbij reed en waarin zeven heeren gezeten waren!

—En een van die zeven mannen moet zonder den minsten twijfel de Moloch zijn geweest! riep Raffles uit. Mijn hond vergist zich niet!

—Maar ons onderzoek dienaangaande heeft volstrekt niets opgeleverd, Edward! hield Charly vol.

—Omdat wij geen tijd hebben kunnen vinden, het lang genoeg voort te zetten, dat is alles! In die auto zat om te beginnen Flannagan, de verloofde van miss Cissy Vandyke, de dochter van den staalkoning. Hij is inspecteur van politie, en daar hij zelf door een paar leden van de bende niet lang geleden bijna is vermoord, en er ternauwernood het leven heeft afgebracht, moet hij al dadelijk worden uitgeschakeld. Dan zat Buster Finn in de auto, de halfgare neef van Peter Vandyke, een sukkel, die eeuwig lacht om de kinderachtigste dingen, wiens aandacht bijna geheel en al in beslag wordt genomen door zijn dassen en overhemden, zijn zijden sokken en zijn wandelstokjes, en die niet meer hersens heeft dan een garnaal! Ook hij valt buiten iedere verdenking. Wij weten nu ook wel zeker, dat de heeren Chesterton en Brain, twee vrienden van den huize Vandyke, onmogelijk aan het hoofd van zulk een bende kunnen staan. Maar naar de levensomstandigheden van de drie overigen wil en zal ik nader onderzoek doen!

—Je weet, dat je op ons beiden kunt rekenen, antwoordde Charly eenvoudig. Als je werkelijk gelooft, dat de Moloch onder die drie mannen moet schuilen, dan moet het, dunkt mij, niet onmogelijk zijn, tenslotte achter zijn geheim te komen! Maar intusschen kun je nu bezwaarlijk als Willem van den Heuvel blijven voortleven!

—Waarom niet?

—Wel, het is nu wel glashelder dat de Moloch je doorzien heeft, en je ontvluchting uit zijn huis aan de grens van de stad zal het laatste restje van twijfel bij hem wegnemen! Als je werkelijk de Hollandsche staalhandelaar was geweest, dan zou het je niet moeilijk zijn gevallen, binnen vier-en-twintig uur je identiteit te bewijzen! En dan is er nog iets!

—Laat hooren!

—Je bent in de val geloopen, die de Moloch voor je had opgezet, doordat je gevolg hebt gegeven aan een gefingeerd schrijven van miss Cissy, die al eens in persoonlijke aanraking met Raffles is geweest! Zij schreef je een briefje, om je bij haar te ontbieden, daar ze je hulp noodig heette te hebben, en je bent op weg naar het huis van haren vader door de bandieten overvallen, bewusteloos geslagen en weggevoerd!

—Zeker! Wat zou dat alles?

—Wat dat zou? riep Charly uit. Toen ik een uur later nog niets van je vernam, en in doodelijke ongerustheid in onze hotelkamer op je terugkomst wachtte, daar je niet op het afgesproken uur had getelefoneerd, dat je goed en wel in het huis van den staalkoning zat, heb ik het jonge meisje opgebeld, en toen kwam de waarheid aan het licht, zij had je in het geheel niet geschreven! Het briefpapier moet haar zijn ontstolen en een bekwaam falsaris had haar handschrift nagebootst! Evenmin had zij je later een telefonische bevestiging van haar schrijven gegeven, de bandieten hadden je vraag opgevangen door den draad af te tappen!

—En welke beteekenis heeft dit alles nu volgens jou?

—Dat zul je hooren! Cissy Vandyke moet nu immers begrijpen, dat de man, dien zij om hulp heette [4]te hebben verzocht, en Willem van den Heuvel een en dezelfde persoon zijn, anders had de truc van de bandieten geen doel! Die moeten geweten hebben, dat het jonge meisje met Raffles in verbinding had gestaan, en dat deze haar reeds menigmaal bij had gestaan! Begrijp je mij nu?

—Ik begrijp je, maar ik kan je vrees niet deelen! antwoordde Raffles kalm. En al kon ik dat wel, ik moet mijn rol van Willem van den Heuvel nog eenigen tijd blijven spelen, ook al zou er gevaar aan verbonden zijn!

—En waarom, als ik vragen mag?

—Omdat het de eenige wijze is, de bandieten op mijn spoor te houden!

—Maar voor den duivel ben je daar dan zoo op gesteld? vroeg Charly opgewonden.

—Dat niet bepaald, antwoordde Raffles glimlachend, maar ik zie geen ander middel, om den Moloch te ontmaskeren! Hij zal nu alles in het werk stellen, om zich van mij te ontdoen, en daartoe is het noodig, dat hij zich persoonlijk met de zaak bemoeit. Vroeg of laat, moet ik dus weder met hem in contact komen, en dan zal de slimste de sterkste overwinnen!

—Maar je stelt je op die wijze aan het vreeselijkste gevaar bloot! riep Charly uit.

—Ik erken, dat mijn weg niet over rozen zal gaan, hernam Raffles. Maar het moet! Ik wil en zal dien ellendeling, die in den korten tijd van zijn misdadige loopbaan reeds tientallen menschen heeft vermoord of doen vermoorden, alleen om hen te berooven, overwinnen, evenals ik thans dr. Fox overwonnen heb!

—Ja, de chef van het Genootschap van den Gouden Sleutel zit thans opnieuw achter slot en grendel, maar vergeet niet, dat dit hier te New-York reeds eenmaal het geval is geweest en dat de bende er toch in geslaagd is, hem met waarlijk duivelsche list te doen ontsnappen.

—Ik hoop, dat men hem ditmaal beter zal bewaken! zeide Raffles kortaf.

—En je wilt dus weder naar het Washington Hotel terugkeeren?

—Ja!

—Maar het geheele geval van je ontvoering zal heden reeds in geuren en kleuren in alle bladen staan! hield Charly aan.

—Ga jij het dan aan de redacties vertellen? vroeg Raffles spottend.

—Dat is dwaasheid—maar het zal wel op een andere wijze bekend worden.

—Als je mij dan maar eens wil zeggen, op welke manier! hernam Raffles, een weinig ongeduldig. De bandieten zelven, en de chauffeur van de auto incluis, die natuurlijk in het complot is geweest, zullen er zeker niet over spreken.

—Maar de portier van het hotel, die de auto besteld heeft.

—Welnu? Weet die man dan, wat er een kwartier rijdens verder met mij gebeurd is?

—Dat niet.….. zeide Charly aarzelend, maar miss Cissy Vandyke.…..

—Die zal zeker niets zeggen, zeide Raffles op vasten toon. Neen, daarvoor is het meisje te edel. Ik weet niet, wat zij vermoedt, wat zij denkt, maar ik ben vast overtuigd, dat zij mij tot geen prijs in het verderf zou willen storten. Vergeet niet, dat ik haar en haar vader het leven heb gered. En als je zelf je mond niet hebt voorbij gepraat, dan is er niemand die kan weten, wat er in den afgeloopen nacht met Willem van den Heuvel is geschied.

—Je hebt misschien gelijk! mompelde Charly. Maar toch blijf ik het gevaarlijk noemen.

—Zooveel te beter! zeide Raffles droogjes. Zonder gevaar zou het leven voor mij geen waarde hebben.

—Nu, dan kun je nu tevreden zijn! riep Charly half boos, half lachend uit. Er is gevaar in overvloed.

Henderson had gedurende dit geheele gesprek geen woord gesproken en had zijn meester onophoudelijk aangezien.

Nu zeide hij met trillende stem:

—Neem mij niet kwalijk, Mylord, maar als het gevaar werkelijk groot is, dan zou ik u willen verzoeken, u te mogen vergezellen, en niet meer hier te worden gelaten.

—Ik waardeer je goede bedoeling, Henderson, zeide Raffles op zachten toon, maar het is voor alles beter, dat je voorloopig hier blijft. Je kunt ons beiden, van groot nut zijn, geloof me.

—Zooals Mylord beveelt, zeide de reus eenvoudig.

Voor hem was van dit oogenblik af de zaak afgedaan![5]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK II.
Een politieverslag.
Denzelfden morgen trok Raffles weder naar het Washington Hotel, alsof er niets was gebeurd.

Hij wist maar al te goed, dat er onder het personeel minstens eenige spionnen van de Bende van het Kwade Oog waren, maar hij nam zich voor, een oogje in het zeil te houden, en zich niet bloot te geven.

De strijd tegen den Moloch, den aanvoerder van de vreeselijke misdadigersbende was thans opnieuw ontbrand, en Raffles had een duren eed gezworen, dat hij hem tot het bittere einde zou voortzetten.

In Londen had hij het weten op te nemen tegen het Genootschap van den Gouden Sleutel—en niet zonder succes—hier zou hij de Bende van het Kwade Oog uitroeien, al zou het hem het leven kosten.

Met deze voornemens bezield, betrok Raffles zijn kamer weder.

De portier keek wel eenigszins verbaasd, dat hij den Hollandschen staalhandelaar op zulk een uur zag terugkomen, terwijl hij wist, dat hij den nacht niet in het hotel had doorgebracht, maar de zaak liet hem verder onverschillig.

Ten koste van een groote fooi had Raffles verkregen, dat Busto, de terriër, steeds bij hem moest zijn.

Hij had begrepen, dat de bende er alles op zou zetten, den hond, nu hij eenmaal lucht had gekregen van den Moloch, uit den weg te ruimen.

En Busto was juist het eenige, die hem weder op het spoor zou kunnen brengen.

De beide vrienden bewoonden te zamen drie kamers, waarvan twee slaapkamers en één, die als werkvertrek was ingericht.

Zij liepen alle ineen en kwamen bovendien ieder met een deur op de breede gang uit.

Zij waren nog niet lang op hun kamers terug of de middagédities van de groote bladen werden afgeroepen.

Charly haastte zich naar buiten, teneinde snel een blad te gaan koopen.

Met een nummer van de „New-York World” keerde hij terug.

Hij vouwde het blad haastig open, en doorliep vlug den inhoud, terwijl Raffles hem met de oogen volgde.

Eindelijk slaakte de jonge man een lichten kreet en zeide op fluisterenden toon:

—De heeren journalisten zijn er vlug bij geweest! Er staat een heel relaas over de geschiedenis van vannacht in het blad!

—Maar toch zeker niet over mijn gevangenneming? vroeg Raffles. Want dat is onmogelijk. Dat kan niemand weten, als de bandieten het niet zelf verraden hebben.

—Neen, daar staat niets van in, maar wacht, dan zal ik het je voorlezen.

De beide mannen namen plaats, en Charly begon met vaste stem voor te lezen:

„EEN GEHEIMZINNIGE ZAAK.

Het huis aan de stadsgrens.

In den afgeloopen nacht heeft de politie een vondst gedaan, welke tot allerlei vermoedens aanleiding geeft, en waarvan zij denkt, dat zij in verband moet staan met een of anderen aanslag van de Bende van het Kwade Oog.

Omstreeks drie uur in den nacht reed een politie-agent de ronde in de Pershing Street, een straat in het uiterste Noorden van de stad, die nog slechts aan één zijde is volgebouwd.

De huizenrij, die aan het onbebouwde veld grenst, is nog lang niet gereed.

Ongeveer in het midden van deze nieuwe straat bevindt zich een huis van zes verdiepingen, dat eveneens pas gereed is gekomen, en dat verhuurd was aan een groote maatschappij, die er echter slechts eenige vertrekken gemeubeld had. Laten wij er hier aanstonds aan toevoegen, dat de huur voor drie maanden vooruit betaald was, maar de politie er niet in geslaagd is, deze maatschappij terug te vinden!

Zooals uit het volgende duidelijk blijkt, bestond [6]zij dan ook niet, en heeft zij ook nimmer bestaan.

Naast dit huis staan aan weerszijden twee andere gebouwen, die nog slechts voor de helft voltooid zijn.

De agent liep langzaam langs den zijmuur van een dier huizen, om zich te overtuigen, dat alles in orde was, want in de laatste nachten was hier hout en ijzer weggesleept door nachtelijke bezoekers.

De ordebewaarder vond echter niets verdachts, totdat hij de achterzijde van het zooeven genoemde huis bereikte.

Daar zag hij een man op den grond uitgestrekt liggen, met het gelaat naar den grond gekeerd.

Meenende, dat de man wellicht beschonken was, wilde hij hem bij den arm grijpen, toen hij zijn hand verschrikt terugtrok—zij was nat van bloed!

Dadelijk deed hij zijn dienstlantaarn ontgloeien en een enkele blik was voldoende, om hem te doen zien, dat hij een lijk gevonden had.

In de keel van den man gaapte een vreeselijke wond, die slechts afkomstig kon zijn van den beet van een hond; de sporen van de nagels van het dier waren nog duidelijk te zien.

De agent keek om zich heen, maar hij kon volstrekt niets verdachts ontdekken.

Daarop onderzocht hij de kleederen van den doode.

De man had alles nog bij zich—portefeuille, portemonnaie, ringen, een gouden sigarettenkoker en een brillanten doekspeld—in ieder geval mocht men hier niet aan roof denken.

De agent trachtte de achterdeur van het huis te openen, maar deze was stevig op slot.

Hij wendde den blik naar de onbebouwde vlakte, en toen viel hem een hooge, stalen telefoonmast in het oog.

Onwillekeurig wendde hij zijn blik naar de werkkooi in den top van den mast, toen een kreet van verbazing hem ontsnapte—deze kooi was met een venster op de bovenste verdieping verbonden door een touw of een stalen tros, waarvan de rechte lijn scherp afstak tegen den reeds lichter wordenden hemel.

De agent begreep nu, dat er in dit huis iets geheimzinnigs, iets vreeselijks moest zijn voorgevallen, en hij ging dadelijk assistentie halen.

Een half uur later waren ongeveer 10 agenten, onder aanvoering van een inspecteur en twee detectives, ter plaatse.

Men moest de voordeur met geweld openen, want ook deze was op slot.

Dadelijk verspreidden de agenten zich door het geheele huis en begonnen het van den kelder tot den zolder te doorzoeken.

En in den kelder deden zij een hoogst verrassende vondst!

Daar lag het lijk van een tamelijk grooten hond, met een zwarte vacht, die blijkbaar in een gevecht met een soortgenoot, waarschijnlijk dezelfde, die den man aan de achterzijde van het huis den strot had doorgebeten, het leven had gelaten.

Men wilde het kadaver van den hond reeds in een hoek werpen toen een der agenten een merkwaardige ontdekking deed.

Het zwarte vel van den hond was hier en daar bij lappen van het lichaam gescheurd, maar toen de agent wat nauwkeuriger toekeek, zag hij onder de zwarte huid—een tweede vel!

En dat vel was roestbruin, rood, zooals hondenliefhebbers het noemen.

Wie schetst de verbazing van de ordebewakers, toen het bleek dat de zoogenaamde zwarte hond over zijn geheele lichaam even rosbruin was als aan den kop, en dat hij gestoken was in wat wij een overjas zouden noemen—een voortreffelijk gemaakte tweede huid, met echt, zwart, krullend hondenhaar begroeid.

Er was een kleine opening voor het korte staartstompje gelaten en de „overjas” hield op bij den halsband, die nauw om den hals van het dier sloot.

En het was vrij gemakkelijk, door dezen halsband te openen, het dier zijn jasje aan- en uit te trekken, dat onder den buik was dichtgeregen.

Een oogenblik stonden de agenten sprakeloos en vroegen zich af, wat het doel van deze zonderlinge kleedij kon zijn, maar de inspecteur wilde geen tijd verliezen, beval een der agenten den hond mede te nemen, en zette het onderzoek voort.

In een kamer gelijkvloers vond men een lange tafel met een vuurrood kleed bedekt, waarachter tien stoelen stonden.

Een groote hoek van het vertrek was afgesloten [7]met een zwart gazen scherm, dat tot de zoldering reikte en waarachter, toen men het had stukgesneden, niets anders dan een gemakkelijke leunstoel was geplaatst.

Men zal zich herinneren, dat men eenzelfde inrichting niet lang geleden eveneens heeft aangetroffen in de Boston Street in een afgelegen huis, waar na een hevig gevecht anderhalf dozijn luitenants van den chef der „Bende van het Kwade Oog” gevangen werden genomen.

Daar was echter in den afgeschoten hoek een luik, dat met een onderaardsche gang in verbinding bleek te staan—hier was slechts een deur aanwezig, uitkomende op een smalle gang, die regelrecht naar de achterdeur voerde.

De inspecteur wist nu wel reeds, waaraan hij zich te houden had, maar toch werd het onderzoek voortgezet.

Men doorzocht alle étages, maar vond slechts volkomen leege kamers, zonder een enkel meubelstuk.

Zoo bereikte men de zesde verdieping, en daar zou de verbazing van de agenten nog toenemen.

Want aan het einde van een vrij breede gang vond men een cel, met een stevige stalen deur, en een getralied venster.

En dat de patrouilleerende ordebewaarder goed gezien had, bleek spoedig, want aan een der tralies van het venster was een sterke, ijzeren haak geslagen, die aan het uiteinde van een stevig touw bleek te zitten, waarvan het andere eind bevestigd was aan den telegraafmast.

Twee der tralies waren met geweld uit het metselwerk gedrukt, klaarblijkelijk door een man met meer dan gewone lichaamskracht.

Dicht bij de deur van deze cel vond men twee mannen bewusteloos op den grond liggen, beide met een zware hoofdwonde, juist op dezelfde plek—alsof zij met de hoofden tegen elkander waren gebotst.

De inspecteur herkende aanstonds een dezer mannen als een gevaarlijk inbreker, die reeds een tiental jaren gevangenisstraf achter den rug had, en die pas onlangs weder op vrije voeten was gesteld.

Er kon nu niet meer aan getwijfeld worden—men was hier in een der huizen, waarover de Bende van het Kwade Oog de beschikking had, en in deze cel had een man gevangen gezeten, die, blijkbaar geholpen door andere personen van buiten, geslaagd was om te ontkomen.

Dat is alles wat men weet, voor de rest tast de politie in het duister.

Waarom de man daar gevangen zat—wie het was—hoe de man aan de achterzijde van het huis doodgebeten is—wie daar dien nacht in het huis bijeen waren—dat alles is volmaakt onbekend.

Ook weet de politie niet aan wien de zonderlinge hond toebehoorde, de hond met zijn twee vachten en zijn twee kleuren, want de twee in de cel gevonden mannen, die na eenigen tijd uit hun bewusteloosheid ontwaakten, willen geen opheldering geven.

Zij zwijgen halsstarrig, en halen slechts de schouders op als hun wat gevraagd wordt.

Indien de politie er nog in slaagt, den sleutel tot dit geheimzinnig voorval te vinden, zullen wij niet nalaten er onze lezers onmiddellijk van in kennis te stellen.”

Charly liet het blad zakken, en keek Raffles vragend aan.

Deze had zwijgend geluisterd voorover gebogen, met gefronst voorhoofd, en zeide nu op zachten toon:

—Wat daar geschreven staat wisten wij al, mijn jongen, want wij zijn de voornaamste acteurs in het drama geweest. Maar er is iets wat mij meer bezig houdt dan het geheele relaas—en dat is de hond. Ik kan je niet zeggen hoe het mij nu spijt, dat wij het dier niet wat nader onderzocht hebben.”

—Misschien kan dat nog wel gebeuren, Edward. De politie zal toch het kadaver niet aanstonds begraven, maar eerst eens trachten den eigenaar van het dier te vinden.

—Als zij dien eigenaar vindt, dan heeft zij meteen den Moloch in handen! ging Raffles op zachten toon voort. Daaromtrent bestaat voor mij geen twijfel. Iemand als hij heeft een speurhond noodig, een zeer goede, en daar hij een dubbel leven leidt, moet zijn hond het ook wel doen, daar een herkenning onder sommige omstandigheden gevaarlijk zou kunnen zijn.

Raffles bleef zwijgend eenigen tijd op en neer loopen en hernam toen:

—Ja, wij moeten dien hond tot iederen prijs eens trachten te zien. Dat kan ons van het grootste nut zijn.

Hij streelde Busto over den ruigen kop en zeide:

—Dat is jouw werk geweest, mijn hond. Wie weet, waartoe dit alles leidt.[8]

Hij richtte zich op, en vervolgde:

—De politie mag zooveel onderzoeken als zij wil—ik vrees, dat zij niet veel verder zou komen. En nu ga ik aanstonds een bezoek brengen aan Cissy Vandyke.

—Met welk doel?

—Misschien kan zij mij wel mededeelingen doen, die mij op een spoor kunnen brengen. Zij weet allicht wat meer van die heeren in de auto, die toch zeker vrienden van haar verloofde moeten zijn.

Raffles had zijn hoed en zijn wandelstok gegrepen, en drukte Charly de hand.

—Je kunt hier op mij wachten, ik denk over een uur terug te zijn.

—Zul je je in acht nemen?

—Ik beloof het je, Charly, zeide Raffles glimlachend. In een auto zullen zij mij niet meer vangen.

Raffles knikte Charly nogmaals toe, en verliet het vertrek.

Hij daalde met de lift naar beneden, en stak de breede vestibule over, waar zich op dat oogenblik slechts zeer weinig personen bevonden.

Hij ging op de breede ingangsdeur toe, en stapte op het groote terras, dat met een tiental treden naar het trottoir voerde.

Hij was bezig zijn handschoenen dicht te knoopen, toen hij plotseling het hoofd ophief, en op dezelfde plek onbeweeglijk bleef stilstaan, met een flikkerenden glans in zijn oogen en eenigszins gebogen, als een buffel, die een tijger op de punt van zijn horens wil opvangen, als het ondier den sprong wil wagen …

Op geen tien meter afstand kwam een politieauto aanrijden.

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK III.
Verandering van tooneel.
Raffles was voor alles een man van instincten en ingeving.

Nog in dezelfde seconde begreep hij dat het op hem voorzien was.

Hij had het ernstig gelaat van Flannagan ontdekt, en de chauffeur remde de groote auto reeds, die vlak voor het groote hotel zou stilstaan.

En op hetzelfde oogenblik overdacht Raffles, dat een arrestatie op dit oogenblik zeer noodlottige gevolgen zou hebben, want aan de politie zou hij al evenmin kunnen bewijzen, dat hij Willem van den Heuvel was, als eenige uren geleden aan den Moloch!

Dat beteekende, de vlucht!

Nu was Raffles ook een man van daden, en als hij zich iets voornam, al was het dan om te vluchten, dan treuzelde hij niet, maar deed dadelijk, wat er te doen was.

De weg naar buiten was hem reeds afgesneden, want een ondeelbaar oogenblik zou de auto stilstaan en Flannagan had hem reeds gezien.

Raffles begreep aanstonds wat er geschied moet zijn.

De Moloch, nu zeker wetende wie er achter den persoon van Van den Heuvel school, had den Commissaris van Politie een briefje geschreven, met alle bijzonderheden waarschijnlijk, en deze functionaris begreep dat hij tot de arrestatie moest overgaan al had Raffles aan de politie ontegenzeggelijk groote diensten bewezen.

Raffles liet Flannagan zijn hielen zien, en vloog pijlsnel de vestibule door.

Bij de lift stonden juist eenige personen te wachten op de liftkooi, die naar beneden kwam.

Raffles slingerde hen met kracht terzijde, trok de paar reizigers en de liftboy uit de kooi, die juist beneden was gekomen, sprong er in, klapte de ijzeren deuren dicht, en haalde tegelijkertijd den kleinen hefboom over, die de lift pijlsnel weer naar boven deed schieten, terwijl onder hem het gevloek en het getier der verontwaardigde hotelgasten klonk.

De Groote Onbekende betrad nooit een hotel, of hij onderzocht dadelijk de geheele inrichting, of hij had juist de expreslift uitgezocht, die hem met verbazende [9]vaart tot de twintigste verdieping voerde, dat wil zeggen een verdieping lager, dan waar zich zijn kamers bevonden.

De lift kwam met een hevigen schok op de twintigste verdieping tot staan. Raffles sprong er uit, en wipte bij vier treden tegelijk de breede trap op.

Het was hier nog stil, een stilte die zonderling aandeed, nu hier een man om zijn vrijheid, misschien wel om zijn leven liep!

In een paar tellen was hij op de volgende verdieping, vloog naar zijn kamer, rukte de deur open, en riep den verschrikten Charly toe;

—Zet een pet op en kom mee! Er is onweer aan de lucht! De politie zit ons op de hielen!

Misschien had Charly wel wat willen vragen, maar hij zag aan het gelaat van Raffles, dat het oogenblik daartoe minder gunstig gekozen was.

Hij griste zijn pet van de tafel, liet vliegens vlug een paar voorwerpen in zijn zak glijden, met een snelheid die op ijverig repeteeren wees, en vloog Raffles na, die het vertrek reeds weder had verlaten.

—Doe de deur op slot, dat zal hen misschien eenigen tijd ophouden, als zij denken, dat wij ons hier verscholen hebben! beval Raffles.

Charly gehoorzaamde, en stak den sleutel weer in zijn zak.

Er waren nog tien verdiepingen boven de 21ste.

—Waar gaan wij heen? vroeg Charly.

—Naar het dak, antwoordde Raffles lakoniek.

—En dan?

—Er loopen telefoondraden over, die dwars over de straat gaan, en als we eenmaal aan de overzijde zijn, kunnen we ons gemakkelijk in veiligheid brengen—daar zijn vensterluiken in overvloed.

Onder het spreken waren de beide vrienden voortgerend naar de liftschacht van de zoogenaamde boemellift, die tot bijna aan de zolderverdieping doorliep.

Raffles wilde de deur openrukken, maar dit bleek onmogelijk, er was juist een lift onderweg, en daardoor bleven de deuren automatisch gesloten, om ongelukken te voorkomen.

Door het traliewerk heen hoorde hij duidelijk de opgewonden stemmen van de personen, die zich in de liftkooi bevonden.

—Te laat! zeide hij lakoniek. Wij zullen van onze voeten gebruik moeten maken.

Het werd hoog tijd, want reeds kwam de bovenzijde van de lift te zien.

Raffles en Charly stormden de trap op, die juist tegenover den liftuitgang gelegen was.

Maar nu scheen ook het geheele hotel in rep en roer te zijn, want overal klonken alarmschellen en het geschreeuw van achtervolging, het dichtslaan van deuren en de luide bevelen van den inspecteur en zijn brigadiers.

De eerste auto was zeker aanstonds door anderen gevolgd, te oordeelen naar het stemmenrumoer.

Vlak naast elkander vlogen de twee mannen trap na trap op, nu en dan een lastigen kellner neervellend, die zoo onvoorzichtig was hun den weg te willen versperren, ofschoon hij nog volstrekt niet begreep, wat er eigenlijk aan de hand was.

Dicht op hun hielen klonk het geluid van de voetstappen der dravende agenten.

De toestand werd ieder oogenblik hachelijker.

Maar Raffles en Charly waren geoefende hardloopers—en zij bereikten de zolderverdieping vóór hun achtervolgers!

Door een openstaand vensterraam, dat zij weder achter zich sloten, klauterden zij op het reusachtige dak, waarvan des zomers een groot gedeelte als wintertuin was ingericht.

Midden op het dak stond een reusachtige stellage, die de honderden telefoondraden torste, welke zich naar alle richtingen verspreidden.

Een dikke bundel draden stak de straat over en daalde schuin neer op het dak van het huis aan de overzijde, dat minstens een tiental meter lager gelegen was.

—Doe zooals ik! beval Raffles.

Hij had zijn slappen vilten hoed gegrepen, snelde naar den rand van het dak, en boog den hoed om een viertal draden heen, waarna hij de uiteinden zoo dicht mogelijk bij de draden stevig vasthield.

Charly deed hetzelfde met zijn pet, van het beste Schotsche laken vervaardigd—en toen waagden de beide mannen den overtocht.

Met groote vaart gleden zij langs de schuin gespannen draden over de straat, die hier ongeveer 40 meter breed was.

Hun hoofddeksels schroeiden door de hevige wrijving—maar zij kwamen behouden aan den overkant, al was het dan ook met een vrij gevoeligen smak.

Halfverdoofd krabbelde Charly weder overeind, en zeide:

—Als je het mij vraagt, Edward—ik zou dat kunststukje liever niet herhalen![10]

—Ik vraag het je niet, Charly! antwoordde Raffles kalm. Wij hebben nu niets te doen dan een gastvrij dakluik op te zoeken—na ons uiterlijk een weinig veranderd te hebben!

Reeds terwijl hij sprak, had Raffles den prachtigen, witten baard afgedaan, zij het niet zonder moeite, want het voorwerp was zeer stevig bevestigd!

Hij wischte zijn gelaat snel schoon met den inhoud van een klein fleschje, dat hij in de palm van zijn hand leeggoot, deed de witte pruik verdwijnen, evenals de witte wenkbrauwen, en wijdde zich toen aan zijn kleeding.

Hij trok zijn bovenkleeding uit—keerde ze eenvoudig binnenste buiten en trok ze weder aan.

Zij waren eerst zwart geweest, nu waren zij lichtgrijs.

De hoed werd weggeworpen, en maakte plaats voor een anderen, die uit een der achterzakken te voorschijn werd gehaald.

Ook Charly had met behulp van een kastanjebruin snorretje en een pruik met lange lokken zijn uiterlijk volkomen veranderd, en het zouden scherpe oogen moeten zijn, die de gedaanteverwisseling opmerkten.

De daken waren hier zeer grillig van vorm en zij moesten nu en dan een moeilijke klauterpartij ondernemen.

—Zouden ze onzen overtocht daar beneden niet voorzien hebben? vroeg Charly, hijgend van de inspanning.

—Ik denk het niet—daarvoor ging het wel wat te vlug. Maar al was dat wel het geval, dan komt het er nog niet erg op aan. Daar zie ik al een luik, dat ons als het ware uitnoodigt, er in af te dalen.

Raffles wees op een groot, openstaand dakluik, dat met een ijzeren bout overeind werd gehouden.

Er bleek een ladder tegen aan te staan, en na zich te hebben overtuigd, dat zij op een leegen zolder terecht zouden kamen, klommen de twee mannen er af.

Charly, die achteraan kwam, trok de ijzeren staaf weg, en liet het luik behoedzaam dichtvallen.

De zolder kwam met een deur uit op een smalle gang, en na eenigen tijd aandachtig geluisterd te hebben, daalden de beide mannen de trap af—en van dat oogenblik af, konden zij zich als in veiligheid beschouwen.

Inderdaad, zij bevonden zich in een groote huurkazerne, waarin een vijftigtal gezinnen woonden, en men zou in het geheel geen acht op hen slaan.

Dat bleek hun ook spoedig genoeg, want hier en daar ging een deur open op een der portalen, maar daar de beide vrienden op hun gemak en zonder zich te overhaasten verder liepen, nam niemand notitie van hen, en zij bereikten dan ook ongehinderd de straatdeur.

Juist kuierde een agent met de handen op den rug voorbij—en het was een zonderlinge gewaarwording, dien ordebewaarder daar zoo kalm te zien voortschrijden, terwijl zij beiden nog geen tien minuten geleden als het wild door den jager waren achtervolgd door een geheelen troep van zijn soortgenooten.

De man keek hen onverschillig even aan en ging verder.

Raffles wisselde een glimlach met Charly en zeide:

—Wij schijnen niet de eer te genieten, zijn aandacht waardig te zijn. Kom spoedig mede—en hoe eerder wij deze plek verlaten hoe beter het ook is.

—Maar waar zullen wij nu heengaan?

—Natuurlijk dadelijk Henderson waarschuwen; er is een telefoon in het huis.

De twee mannen stapten de eerste de beste drogisterij binnen, om te kunnen telefoneeren.

Raffles ging naar het toestel, terwijl Charly voor de leus een doosje cigaretten kocht.

Reeds weinige minuten later keerde hij terug naar de plek waar Charly stond.

Zijn gelaat had een ernstige uitdrukking.

—Wat is er gebeurd? vroeg Charly ongerust.

—Er is daar ginds iets geschied—iets wat niet in den haak is.

—Wat antwoordt Henderson je dan?

—Hij antwoord niets—hij is niet thuis.

—En neem je dan maar aanstonds aan dat er iets ernstigs is voorgevallen?

—Ja Charly, want ik had hem nadrukkelijk gelast onder alle omstandigheden thuis te blijven en mijne instructies af te wachten. Wij moeten er dadelijk heen.

De twee mannen verlieten den winkel weder, en sprongen in een huurauto, nadat Raffles den chauffeur had gelast hen naar de Pershing Street te brengen.

Aangespoord door de belofte van een goede fooi liet de chauffeur zijn wagen zoo snel mogelijk loopen, en nog geen half uur later stond de auto stil bij het begin van de Pershing Street.

Raffles stapte uit, betaalde, en snelde de straat in, door Charly op de hielen gevolgd en voortgedreven door een somber voorgevoel, dat hem vleugels scheen te geven.

Maar spoedig vertraagde hij zijn schreden, want [11]voor de deur van het huis waar de drie mannen eenigen tijd gewoond hadden, stond een groot aantal nieuwsgierigen druk ergens over te spreken, terwijl een paar agenten met de handen op den rug voor het huis heen en weder liepen.

Raffles begreep dat het argwaan zou baren, als hij zoo overhaast kwam toesnellen, en daarom matigde hij dadelijk zijne vaart, en wendde zich tot Charly met de woorden:

—Wij zullen ons maar voor verslaggevers uitgeven—op die wijze zullen wij wel te weten komen wat er geschied is.

En daarop stapten de twee mannen onvervaard op een der op post staande politieagenten toe.

—Iets bijzonders te doen? vroeg Raffles, terwijl hij reeds een paar stukjes papier en een potlood te voorschijn haalde.

—Wij zijn van de „New-York Sun”, voegde Charly er aan toe, een brand of iets dergelijks? Waarom staan al die menschen daar?

—Heel iets anders dan een brand, mijnheer, een gevecht met een soort wildeman!

—Een krankzinnige ontsnapt? vroeg Raffles, ofschoon hij de waarheid reeds begon te vermoeden.

—Of de man krankzinnig is, weet ik niet, maar in ieder geval ging hij te keer als de baarlijke duivel.

—Maar waarom dan? vroeg Charly, was hij beschonken? Wat was er dan met dien man?

—Ik hoor dat hij een medeplichtige moet zijn geweest van een bekenden Londenschen inbreker, die mijn collega’s hier wilden arresteeren. Zij waren met hun achten—en we hopen dat zij er alle acht bovenop zullen komen.

—Dus—is die man niet gevat? vroeg Raffles, terwijl hij zijn adem inhield, en den agent met een onwillekeurig gebaar bij den arm greep.

—Gevat? Het mocht wat, antwoordde de agent op schamperen toon, hij heeft hen half dood geslagen, dat is de zaak! Zij zeggen dat hij een ware reus was, en dat hij ook wel tien had aangekund.

Raffles en Charly hadden zoogenaamd eenige aanteekeningen gemaakt en nu kwam een der bewoners van het huis zich bij hen voegen, met de opmerking: Ik heb het op een afstand gezien, mijnheer, en ik zeg u, het was een formeele veldslag! Die man smeet de agenten heen en weer alsof het kegels waren, en als er een overeind gekrabbeld was, sloeg hij er twee andere voor neer, op een gegeven oogenblik zaten er drie op zijn nek, en hij schudde hen af, alsof zij stofjes waren! Het was een helsch kabaal en de agenten schreeuwden om assistentie, voor zoover ze nog geluid konden geven, maar niemand durfde tusschenbeide komen, die man had vuisten als smidshamers, en wat hij er mee trof, dat had niets meer in te brengen.

De agent had een weinig ongeduldig toegeluisterd, uit zijn humeur omdat men zijn verhaal onderbroken had, en zeide nu:

—Je beschrijving kan goed zijn, vriend, maar in het aantal politieagenten vergis je je, het waren er acht.

Raffles en Charly hadden elkander een snellen blik toegeworpen, waaruit hun groote vreugde sprak.

Henderson was in ieder geval ontsnapt.

—Waar heeft die homerische strijd plaats gehad? vroeg Raffles zonder dat zijne stem eenige ontroering verried.

—In de kamer waar die man woonde, mijnheer, antwoordde de agent, maar zij is niet meer te herkennen. U zoudt er geen enkel meubelstuk meer kunnen vinden, dat nog bruikbaar is, of waarvan u den oorspronkelijken vorm nog zoudt herkennen, ik zeg u, de man sloeg met de stoelen om zich heen als Simson met het ezelskinnebak. Mijn collega’s niet te na gesproken.

—Wij zouden die kamer gaarne eens willen zien, zeide Raffles, terwijl zijn vingers als toevallig naar zijn vestzakje afdwaalden.

De man met wien hij sprak zou geen New-Yorksche agent zijn, als hij het gebaar niet onmiddellijk begrepen had.

Hij gaf den beiden gewaanden verslaggevers een knipoogje en zeide:

—Gaat u dan maar even met mij mee, ik zal u de ruïne laten zien, allee, een beetje op zij, menschen!

Dit laatste was tot de nieuwsgierigen, die zich nog altijd voor de huisdeur verdrongen, en die nu terzijde weken om plaats voor de drie mannen te maken.

Zoodra Raffles en Charly waren binnengetreden kregen zij reeds een voorproefje van wat hen te wachten stond!

De ijzeren spijlen van de trapleuning waren voor het meerendeel kromgebogen en sommigen waren zelfs uit het hol gerukt terwijl de leuning zelve over de lengte van een paar meters versplinterd was.

—Dat ziet er uit alsof er een piano tegen aan is gekwakt nietwaar mijnheer, vroeg de agent, terwijl hij op de gehavende plek wees als een oppasser van een of ander museum die een bijzondere merkwaardigheid heeft aan te wijzen.

De drie mannen beklommen de trap, gingen het portaal [12]over en bereikten zoo de deur van de kamer, welke Raffles en Charly eenige weken tot verblijf had verstrekt.

Zij bleven verbaasd op den drempel staan, en keken elkander even glimlachend aan.

De agent had niets te veel gezegd, een troep wilde buffels, die dwars door het vertrek zou zijn gegaloppeerd had onmogelijk een grooter verwoesting kunnen aanrichten.

De tafel, die steeds bij het raam gestaan had, lag in een hoek en drie van de pooten ontbraken er aan, de vierde stak als een dreigende wijsvinger omhoog.

Tijdens de hevige worsteling was er zeker een kluwen worstelende mannen op het ijzeren ledikant terecht gekomen, want het was bezweken, en door midden geknakt.

Hier en daar hing het behang aan flarden, de electrische lamp bungelde alleen nog maar heen en weder aan het geleidingssnoer, de vijf stoelen waren versplinterd, en van enkele was zelfs de zitting opengereten, zoodat het paardenhaar naar buiten puilde.

Zelfs de twee ordinaire oleogravuren, die in hunne vergulde lijsten hoog aan den muur hadden gehangen, vertoonden vuistgroote gaten en hingen scheef aan de koorden.

Alles wat van glas of aardewerk was lag aan gruizels op den vloer, die er geheel mee overdekt was.

De deur die naar de kleine slaapkamer voerde, waar Raffles en Charly gerust hadden, hing nog slechts scheef aan een hengsel en het bovenste paneel was ingeslagen.

Alle ruiten van de vensters waren gebroken.

Kortom, het vertrek leverde een aanblik op, alsof er weken lang door een dronken bende was huis gehouden.

—Wat zeg u daar wel van? vroeg de agent van politie op den toon van den concierge van een historisch kasteel, die eenige gruwelwerktuigen aan de bezoekers laat zien.

—Ik zeg, dat de man die zich hier verdedigde tegen acht agenten waarschijnlijk over reuzenkrachten beschikt, antwoordde Raffles glimlachend, ik geloof niet dat er in het geheele vertrek nog een voorwerp is, de moeite van het repareeren waard!

—En het heeft geen tien minuten geduurd, mijnheer, riep de agent uit, ik hoor dat er eerst vier van mijn collega’s waren binnengetreden, maar er had evengoed niemand kunnen zijn, die kerel speelde met hen als de kat met de muis en de vier andere moesten ter hulp komen, en toen bleek er nog niet voldoende te zijn! Hij wist de kamer uit te komen, met de drie agenten achter zich aan, die zich nog zoo een beetje bewegen konden, de vijf andere lagen plat op den vloer, maar op de trap moet hij hen van zich hebben afgeschud, als een poedel die in het water gelegen heeft, de druppels! Hij kon de voordeur bereiken, vloog den chauffeur van de politie-auto omver, die hem nog trachtte tegen te houden, zoodat de stumper een meter of vijf verder tegen de steenen rolde en was reeds lang uit het gezicht, toen mijn makkers in deze kamer tot het inzicht kwamen, dat zij nog tot de levenden behoorden, het heele vrachtje moest met de politie-auto direct naar een gasthuis worden vervoerd. En zoo heeft het voertuig dan toch nog dienst gedaan! voegde hij er op grimmigen toon aan toe.

Raffles en Charly hadden glimlachend naar het verhaal staan luisteren, en nu en dan een aanteekening gemaakt.

Zij keken nog even rond en daarop drukte Raffles den agent tersluiks een geldstuk in de hand, en zeide tot Charly.

—Kom maar mee, collega, er zit een mooi stukje aan!

De twee mannen knikten den agent toe, en verlieten de kamer en het huis.

Op straat riepen zij dadelijk een huurauto aan, en Raffles gaf den chauffeur bevel hem naar het administratiegebouw van de „New-York Times” te brengen, om daar een advertentie ter plaatsing op te geven van den volgenden inhoud:

„Chauffeur gevraagd voor spoedige indiensttreding, niet onder de vijf-en-dertig jaar. Aanmelden Astoria Hotel.”

Nog dienzelfden avond stond de advertentie in het blad, en om drie uur vijftig minuten in den nacht—dat was de beteekenis van het cijfer vijf-en-dertig in de advertentie—kwam een man van reusachtigen lichaamsbouw vóór het Astoria Hotel, waar Raffles en Charly sedert een paar minuten op en neer liepen—het was James Henderson, die de advertentie gelezen had, haar beteekenis kende en zich na zijn gelukkige ontsnapping bij zijn meester kwam voegen!

Maar de gérant van het Astoria Hotel had aan een laffe grap gedacht, toen zich dien avond honderden werklooze chauffeurs voor een baantje kwamen aanmelden, en niet dan met moeite waren weg te krijgen.[13]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK IV.
Op Coney Island.
Met tranen in de oogen had Henderson de hand van zijn meester gegrepen en die krachtig gedrukt, en daarna had Charly Brand dezelfde betuiging van vriendschap moeten ondergaan, die hem zijn vingers met een pijnlijk gezicht deden betasten.

Hij wist het bij ondervinding—als de reus iemand hartelijk de hand drukte, dan voelde men het dagen later nog!

Het bleek, dat Henderson in een der avondbladen reeds het relaas had gelezen van de stoutmoedige ontvluchting van den gewaanden Willem van den Heuvel en zijn zoogenaamden secretaris, uit het Washington Hotel.

En zoo behoefden de drie mannen elkander niets meer mede te deelen.

—Wij kunnen hier niet blijven, vrienden! zeide Raffles op zachten toon, het is noodig, dat de onrust een weinig bedaart en dat wij ons een weinig afzijdig houden gedurende eenige dagen.

—Als wij eens de plek opzochten, waar wij den „Duivel der Lucht” hebben ondergebracht, en doodeenvoudig naar Londen terugkeerden, kwam Charly langs zijn neus weg!

—Weet je dan wie de Moloch is? vroeg Raffles, terwijl hij zijn doordringende grijze oogen strak op het gelaat van den jongen man vestigde.

—Neen, Edward, dat weet ik niet!

—Welnu, dan kunnen wij ook nog niet vertrekken! hernam Raffles kortaf. Ik ga niet terug vóór mijn taak hier beëindigd is!

—Zooals je wilt! zeide Charly zuchtend. Ik zie wel, dat ik den beker tot op den bodem zal moeten ledigen!

—Dat heb je daar goed uitgedrukt, mijn waarde! zeide Raffles droogjes. Zoo is het inderdaad! En nu zullen wij eens een onderdak gaan zoeken, want ik geloof, dat het tijd wordt om aan onze nachtrust te gaan denken.

Te New-York kan men den geheelen nacht door huur-auto’s op straat vinden, en zoo duurde het niet lang of de drie mannen werden door zulk een voertuig naar een klein logement van de havenwijk gebracht.

Raffles had met opzet een gelegenheid uitgekozen, die niet al te goed bekend stond, omdat hij wel wist, dat de eigenaar daarvan hen niet om legitimatiepapieren zou lastig vallen.

Die eigenaar was een zwaargebouwde Ier met borstelig, zwart haar als van een ever, twee stekende zwarte oogen en dichte, ver boven die oogen uitstekende wenkbrauwen.

Raffles had hem slechts een paar woorden in de dieventaal toegevoegd; de eigenaar had eens gegrijnsd en een paar minuten later kregen de drie mannen een paar vrij goede kamers.

Zij sliepen gerust en stonden pas om bij half negen op.

Zoodra zij bijeen zaten in de gelagkamer, waar zich enkele matrozen en stokers van allerlei nationaliteit en kerels met een zeer verdacht uiterlijk bevonden, en aan het eenvoudige ontbijt zaten, begon Raffles:

—Ik heb reeds een plan gevormd, wij zullen naar het Coney Island gaan!

—Is dat niet die reusachtige kermis, een lunapark in het groot? vroeg Henderson op zachten toon.

—Ja, mijn vriend, antwoordde Raffles! Wij hebben in Londen ook wel eens zooiets, maar het is altijd maar een zwakke nabootsing van hetgeen Coney Island oplevert op het gebied van rutchbanen, lachhuizen, duivelsraderen, glijbanen, en hoe al die monsterachtige verzinsels nog meer mogen heeten. Er zijn daar schiettenten, kramen van allerlei aard, zweefmolens en honderden kramen,—en er zal voor ons wel werk zijn, want duizenden verdienen daar hun brood. Het is als het ware een kleine stad op zichzelf—daar op het eiland van het vermaak.

—Maar dan zullen wij ons toch moeten verkleeden! zeide Charly. Wij kunnen daar zoo niet heengaan.

—Dat spreekt van zelf! beaamde Raffles. Henderson moet aanstonds eens naar een uitdrager gaan en kleederen voor ons koopen; wij moeten ook ons gelaat onkenbaar maken—het is slechts voor een paar [14]dagen. De hoofdzaak is dat men ons een weinig vergeet, en ons spoor bijster raakt. Ik geloof dat Henderson een heel goed figuur zou maken als negerportier, jij kunt, Charly, als je er lust in hebt voor mijnentwege als buffetjuffrouw fungeeren en ik voel wel iets voor de betrekking van barkeeper; wij moeten echter in ieder geval dicht bij elkander blijven.

—En wat doen we met Busto? vroeg Charly, terwijl hij den ruigen terriër streelde.

—Het spijt mij voor het dier—maar ik zal beginnen met het te laten scheren, antwoordde Raffles. Busto is een opvallend mooie hond, en het zou wel eens kunnen, dat zijn signalement bij de politie bekend is; hier in deze volksbuurt zal wel ergens een hondenscheerder zijn en anders zou ik het zelf moeten doen.

—Zou het niet te koud zijn om den hond van zijn vacht te ontdoen?

—Wij zullen een dekkleedje voor hem maken.

De drie mannen hadden hun maaltijd beëindigd, en togen nu aanstonds aan het werk; terwijl Raffles met den hond een hondenscheerder ging opzoeken, trok Henderson op onderzoek uit naar wat oude kleederen, terwijl Charly op den uitkijk bleef.

Raffles en Henderson keerden bijna tegelijkertijd terug; de eerste met een onkenbaar geworden terriër, die met zijn houding geen raad wist, nu hij zich van al zijn haar ontdaan gevoelde, en Henderson beladen met een zwaar pak kleederen.

Weer wisselde Raffles een paar op fluisterenden toon gevoerde woorden met den waard, waarop deze het drietal naar een afgelegen vertrek voerde, hetwelk met een deur toegang gaf tot een smalle gang, die op een steeg uitkwam.

Raffles betaalde den waard, sloot de deur, en nu begonnen de drie mannen zich snel te verkleeden; een half uur later zou niemand in hen de drie mannen herkend hebben, die hier den nacht hadden doorgebracht.

Zelfs Henderson was ondanks zijn herculischen lichaamsbouw door Raffles zoodanig behandeld met allerlei kleursels en stiften dat zijn gelaat een geheel andere uitdrukking had gekregen.

De hond kreeg een rafelig stuk touw om den nek, hetgeen hem niet weinig scheen te grieven, en daarop trok het drietal door de achterdeur zonder dat iemand hen opmerkte.

De drie mannen richtten hun schreden naar de haven, waar zij wisten, dat om de tien minuten een boot naar Coney Island zou afvaren.

Op dezen tijd van den dag waren er nog niet veel vermaakzoekers, en de drie mannen konden dus ongestoord met elkander praten.

De overtocht duurde ongeveer tien minuten, en toen stonden zij voor de geweldige toegangspoort die naar de stad van Het Vermaak voerde.

Er bevonden zich daar nog slechts enkele provincialen, gewapend met groote valiezen en manden, monsterachtig groote regenschermen, en hoeden van een halve eeuw terug, die met open mond naar al de wonderen staarden, welke zich hier in schreeuwende kleuren en onder oorverdoovend lawaai aan hen openbaarden.

Maar de drie mannen waren om een ander doel gekomen, dan om hier vermaak te zoeken. Zij liepen achtereenvolgens alle tenten, kramen, draaimolens en andere gelegenheden af en het duurde niet lang of zij hadden alle een baantje. Bij Henderson ging het al zeer gemakkelijk, want om hem werd letterlijk gevochten.

De directeurs begrepen dat er uit dezen reus een onbeperkte hoeveelheid arbeid was te halen.

Gelukkig waren de drie mannen op een kleine plek bijeengekomen, Raffles als bediende in een wijnhuis, Charly als helper bij een zweefbaan; zijn weinig eervolle taak bestond hierin, dat hij de zweeflustigen die aan een katrol langs een draad naar beneden gleden een duwtje moest geven om vaart te krijgen, en Henderson als portier van een bioscoop.

Al deze zaken waren vrij dicht bij den ingang gelegen, en men kon vandaar het voorplein gemakkelijk overzien.

Zoo werd het avond, en de drie vrienden verrichtten hun bezigheden alsof zij hun geheele leven niet anders hadden gedaan.

In den loop van den middag was het reeds veel drukker geworden, en het geraas van de glijbanen, de straatdraaimolens en de rutchbanen was nu werkelijk oorverdoovend.

Zoodra de duisternis viel wenden allerwegen de groote booglampen ontstoken en het reusachtige terrein baadde in het helwitte licht.

Den geheelen dag hadden de drie mannen hun oogen goed den kost gegeven, in de hoop, op deze plek iets te ontdekken dat hun van nut zou kunnen zijn.

Het was elf uur in den avond toen Raffles eindelijk vrij kreeg, en afgelost zou worden door een collega voor den nachtdienst, die, tusschen haakjes, heel wat voordeeliger was.

Hij maakte Busto los, die al dien tijd in een soort [15]waschhok vastgebonden was geweest, en het dier sprong dol van blijdschap om hem heen.

Maar vlak bij de ingangspoort stond de hond eensklaps doodstil, hief den schranderen kop op, en begon ijverig te snuffelen.

En eensklaps stoof hij vooruit, en rende op een kleine nieuw opgelakte auto toe, waarin, behalve de chauffeur, vier heeren waren gezeten.

Het dier had evenwel den wagen nog niet bereikt, of deze zette zich in beweging, en reed snel weg, terwijl de hond brommend en zachtjes jankend achterbleef.

Raffles had de auto wel gezien, maar de personen, die er zich in bevonden, waren onzichtbaar voor hem gebleven, daar de auto zich van hem verwijderde.

Hij keek om zich heen, in de hoop, dat hij een huurauto zou kunnen vinden, om de roode auto te kunnen achtervolgen, maar het lot was tegen hem; er was heinde en verre geen huurauto te zien.

—De tweede maal! riep Raffles tandenknarsend uit. De schurk is mij alweder ontsnapt. Ik zou er op durven zweren, dat hij daar in die auto zat, die nu uit het gezicht is verdwenen.

Hij bedacht zich niet lang, maar begaf zich naar de bioscoop, waar Henderson nog altijd voor de deur stond, en zeide: Ga mede, Henderson!

—En mijn baantje hier, Mylord? vroeg de reus.

—Laat dat maar varen, zeide Raf£les ongeduldig.

—Dat laat ik mij geen tweemaal zeggen, Mylord, want het is met uw welnemen niets voor mij, zeide Henderson met een zucht van verlichting, er is niet genoeg handeling in, ziet gij.

—O, het zal niet lang duren of we zullen handeling in overvloed hebben, James, hernam Raffles, kom, laten wij spoedig mijnheer Brand waarschuwen.

Henderson verliet dadelijk zijn post, ondanks het vloekend getier van den directeur der bioscoop, ten einde zijn meester te volgen.

Gezamenlijk begaven zij zich naar de zweefbaan, waar Charly zich juist gereed maakte, een zeer zwaarlijvige dame een zetje te geven die boven op de stellage gereed stond, zich te laten afglijden, en reeds met krampachtig gesloten vuisten de lus van de katrol vasthield.

—Kom naar beneden, Charly! beval Raffles.

—Krijg ik nu een duwtje of niet? riep de dikke juffrouw woedend.

—Komt u morgen op denzelfden tijd maar eens terug! voegde Charly haar toe; ik heb op het oogenblik geen tijd meer.

En terwijl de dikke dame onder het schaterend gelach der omstanders hopeloos boven op het plankier bleef staan, daalde Charly snel de smalle trap af en voegde zich bij zijne twee metgezellen.

—Wat is er gaande? vroeg hij op gedempten toon.

—Er is gaande, dat Busto zooeven opnieuw den Moloch heeft geroken! antwoordde Raffles, terwijl hij de vuisten balde.

—Weet je het zeker?

—Er valt niet aan te twijfelen. Hij moet den heelen avond op het terrein zijn geweest om met een paar vrienden zich te amuseeren. Het zou mij honderdduizend dollar waard geweest zijn als ik Busto vrij had laten rondloopen, want die zou den bandiet spoedig hebben ontdekt.

—Heb je de auto gezien? vroeg Charly.

—Ja, het was een vuurroode wagen maar een tamelijk gangbaar model zooals er hier honderden rondloopen.

—Wat wil je doen?

—Mijn onderzoek voortzetten! Het kan mij niet meer schelen of het gevaar oplevert, ik moet hem terugvinden. Wij zullen een nieuw plan op touw moeten zetten! Ik heb al iets bedacht, dat wellicht zal slagen. Hier wil ik niet meer blijven, want ik heb het gevoel alsof iedere seconde welke ik nog hier blijf nutteloos verspild is.

Een oogenblik later hadden de drie mannen het kermisterrein verlaten, en zich naar de aanlegplaats van de boot begeven, vergezeld door Busto, die blijkbaar den hemel dankte dat hij eindelijk uit zijn waschhok bevrijd was. Van de roode auto was niets meer te ontdekken en het was duidelijk dat zij reeds met een vorige boot was overgestoken.

Zoodra zij weder de kade van New-York bereikt hadden, zei Raffles:

—Neem gij beiden uw intrek weder in het logement waar wij dezen nacht geweest zij, let goed op mijn seinen, ik keer naar het centrum van de stad terug, morgen zul je wel nader van mij hooren.[16]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK V.
Bij Richard Chesterton.
Richard Chesterton bewoonde een fraai huis in de twintigste straat.

Het was omstreeks tien uur in den morgen van den volgenden dag toen een statige bediende met spierwit haar het studeervertrek van Chesterton binnentrad, waar zijn meester zooeven was binnengetreden.

—Daar is iemand die moet u spreken! kondigde hij aan.

Chesterton wierp een verbaasden blik op de pendule, en zeide:

—Nu? op dit uur? Hoe is de naam van die bezoeker?

—Ik heb hem zijn naam gevraagd, mijnheer, maar hij zeide dat die er niets toe deed, omdat gij dien toch niet kende.

—Gaf hij dan het doel van zijn bezoek niet op?

—Ook niet, mijnheer! Hij zeide slechts dat hij u over een zeer ernstige zaak moest spreken.

—Hoe zag hij er uit?

—Een eerwaardig heer, ongeveer zestig jaar, hij beeft een klein handvalies bij zich.

Chesterton dacht nog even na en zeide toen schouderophalend:

—Nu, laat dien heer maar binnen!

De bediende verwijderde zich en liet een oogenblik later een man binnen die er juist zoo uitzag zooals hij hem beschreven had, een zestigjarig grijsaard met een eerwaardig uiterlijk en die een klein handvalies droeg.

Hij bleef even op den drempel van de deur staan, terwijl Chesterton opstond om hem te verwelkomen, met een trek van verbazing op zijn gelaat, dien hij hoffelijk trachtte te verbergen.

—Neem plaats wat ik u verzoeken mag, mijnheer! zeide Chesterton, met een uitnoodigend gebaar naar een gemakkelijken stoel.

De bezoeker sloot de deur achter zich en ging langzaam naar de hem aangewezen plaats terwijl hij zijn blikken aandachtig in het rond liet glijden.

Ten slotte vestigde hij ze onderzoekend op Chesterton, die achter zijn schrijftafel had plaats genomen, en begon:

—Ik kan mij voorstellen, mijnheer, dat gij wel wat verwonderd zijt over dit vroege bezoek van een vreemdeling. Uw bediende zal u echter wel hebben medegedeeld dat ik over een ernstige zaak met u kwam spreken.

—Dat deed hij inderdaad, mijnheer! zeide Chesterton terwijl hij zijn bezoeker nieuwsgierig opnam, zoudt ge mij de reden van uw bezoek uiteen willen zetten?

—Aanstonds, mijnheer.

De bezoeker bekeek een oogenblik zijn blanke gespierde handen, vestigde toen opnieuw zijn doordringenden blik op Chesterton en hernam:

—Sta mij toe met een vraag te beginnen, mijnheer. Gij zijt immers een vriend van Peter Vandyke en zijn dochter Cissy.

Chesterton keek verbaasd op, en antwoordde: Dat ben ik inderdaad, mijnheer, ik heb geen enkele reden om het te ontkennen! Mag ik weten waarom gij mij die vraag stelt.

—Dat zal u aanstonds duidelijk worden, antwoordde de bezoeker glimlachend.

Hij sloeg zijn eene been over het andere, en vervolgde: Als gij een vriend van den huize Vandyke zijt, dan zal u er natuurlijk veel aan gelegen zijn dat hun geen onheil overkomt, welnu, het is natuurlijk voor u geen geheim, evenmin als voor een ander bewoner van deze stad dat Peter Vandyke zoowel als zijn dochter in deze dagen aan een zeer groot gevaar blootstaan.

—Wat wilt gij zeggen, mijnheer, vroeg Chesterton verwonderd, ik begrijp u niet!

—Dan zal ik wat duidelijker moeten zijn, ik bedoel dat de bende van Het Kwade Oog helaas nog altijd bestaat, dat haar aanvoerder nog leeft, en dat de bedreigingen aan het adres van den staalkoning weder begonnen zijn.

Chesterton was half van zijn stoel opgerezen en staarde den eerwaardigen ouden heer met groote oogen aan.[17]

—Gij hebt gelijk! Vandyke verkeert nog altijd in groot gevaar! Komt ge me soms zeggen dat gij een complot ontdekt hebt?

—Neen, dat niet, mijnheer, antwoordde de grijsaard, zoover gaat mijn kennis niet! Alles wat ik weet is dat het leven van Peter Vandyke niet veilig zal zijn voor de bende van Het Kwade Oog is uitgeroeid—dat wil zeggen voor haar aanvoerder is gevangen.

—En komt gij hier om mij dat te zeggen, mijnheer, riep Chesterton eenigszins ongeduldig uit.

—Neen, mijnheer, niet daarom! hernam de bezoeker rustig. Ik kom u voorstellen, mij te helpen om de bende onschadelijk te maken! Ik ben er van overtuigd dat gij u gelukkig zoudt prijzen als gij er toe zoudt kunnen bijdragen een einde te maken aan het schrikbewind van die bende.

—Dat zou ik zeker, mijnheer, riep Chesterton uit, nu ten hoogste verbaasd, maar zoudt gij mij eindelijk eens willen zeggen wie gij zijt, dat gij mij dit voorstel komt doen.

—Ik ben John Raffles, kwam er kalm over de lippen van den bezoeker.

Het volgende oogenblik vloog de lade van het schrijfbureau open en Chesterton nam er met een driftige beweging zijn revolver uit.

Hij was zeer bleek geworden en zijn wenkbrauwen waren dreigend samengetrokken toen hij op gedempten toon uitriep: Gij zijt de gentleman-inbreker, en dat durft gij mij hier in mijn gezicht te komen zeggen? Steek uw handen op!

De mond van de revolver wees in de richting van den bezoeker, maar deze bleef in dezelfde gemakkelijke houding in zijn stoel achteruitleunen en trok met welbehagen aan de sigaar, welke Chesterton hem zooeven had gepresenteerd.

—Ik zou die revolver maar wegdoen, zeide hij rustig, zij is volkomen nutteloos, denkt gij mij met een ongeladen revolver vrees aan te jagen?

Met een woedend gebaar klapte Chesterton de revolver open—het magazijn was ledig!

—Ik lees verwondering en schrik op uw gelaat! merkte Raffles fijntjes op, gij begrijpt niet hoe de patronen uit de revolver verdwenen zijn welke gij toch zelf geladen in die lade hadt gelegd! Ik zal u niet lang in de onzekerheid laten—ik heb ze er zelf uitgehaald.

—Gij zijt dus reeds hier geweest? vroeg Chesterton heesch.

—Ja, vannacht!

—Wat zegt gij daar? waart gij vannacht hier? dus—een inbraak?

—Niet in de gewone beteekenis, waarde heer! gij zult geen zilveren theelepeltje, geen dollar missen! en toch zijt gij zoo onvoorzichtig geweest bijna twintigduizend dollar in dat ijzeren kistje daarginds in die kast te sluiten; gij kunt het openen en u overtuigen dat ik ze niet heb aangeroerd.

—Dat doet er niet toe! ik weet wat mij te doen staat, riep Chesterton driftig.

Met een vlug gebaar nam hij het telefoontoestel.

—Hallo, juffrouw, met het hoofdbureau van politie, onmiddellijk.

Chesterton hield de oogen strak op zijn bezoeker gevestigd, maar deze had zelfs niet met de oogen geknipt, en rookte kalm verder.

—Hallo, juffrouw, met het hoofdbureau van politie, herhaalde Chesterton stampvoetend. Vervloekt, ik krijg geen gehoor.

—Dat is geen wonder, waarde heer, ik ben zoo vrij geweest den draad door te knippen.

Met een snelle beweging bukte Chesterton zich over zijn bureau en uitte een gesmoorden vloek.

Het was waar—het bruine snoer was doorgesneden, en het eind lag op het wijnroode karpet.

Langzaam legde hij het nu nutteloos geworden toestel weder weg, wierp de revolver in de lade, schoof haar dicht en liet zich in zijn schrijfstoel vallen.

Hij beet woedend een stuk van zijn pas aangestoken sigaar en vroeg kortaf:

—Wat wilt gij van mij—waarom zijt gij vannacht hier gekomen, als gij toch niets hebt medegenomen?

—Tot beter begrip van de zaak zal ik u het eerst op de eerste vraag antwoorden, zeide Raffles, die geen seconde zijn beminnelijke kalmte verloren had. Gij moet weten, dat ik mij tot het uiterste inspan om op het spoor te komen van den Moloch, dat is de naam waaronder het hoofd van de Bende van Het Kwade Oog bij de leden bekend is, en ik moet zeggen dat het van uwe zijde van zwarte ondankbaarheid getuigt, dat gij op staanden voet een man wilt neerschieten of laten arresteeren die de politie reeds zoo krachtig heeft bijgestaan bij haar pogingen om de bende uit te roeien; en nu ga ik nog stilzwijgend de diensten voorbij, welke ik aan uw vriend Vandyke heb bewezen—en die toch misschien wel waard zijn dat men ze zich herinnert! Maar laat ons ter zake komen. Ik heb een hond wien ik de lucht van een door den Moloch verloren stuk goed heb kunnen geven. Welnu, het dier heeft [18]dezer dagen woedend een auto aangeblaft waarin zeven heeren gezeten waren! Vier heb ik daarvan herkend en onder die vier waart ook gij.

—Welnu, wat zou dat? vroeg Chesterton, een weinig zachter gestemd. Het krankzinnige denkbeeld heeft toch niet bij u post gevat dat ik de Moloch zou zijn?

—Men kan nooit weten, antwoordde Raffles lakoniek! Onder de gearresteerde luitenants hebben zich personen bevonden, die een eervolle plaats in de maatschappij bekleedden. Niemand zou hen een oogenblik hebben durven verdenken, en toch waren zij moordenaars en dieven!

—Nu begrijp ik het—gij hebt u dus willen overtuigen dat op mij in ieder geval de verdenking niet kon rusten de chef van die vreeselijke bende te zijn, riep Chesterton uit.

—Gij hebt het geraden! Ik heb scherpe oogen, en ik had allicht iets ontdekt, wat u zou hebben verraden, bovendien had ik mijn hond meegenomen! Het beest snuffelde wel een weinig rond, wat natuurlijk is, omdat gij met den Moloch in een auto hebt gezeten, maar ik ken het dier. Het zou zich heel anders hebben gedragen als hij zich in het huis van den chef zou hebben bevonden.

—En is het onbescheiden als ik zou vragen, waarom gij geen souvenir uit mijn huis hebt medegenomen, vroeg Chesterton sarcastisch.

—Dat heb ik slechts nagelaten, mijnheer Chesterton, om u te bewijzen, dat gij in dit bijzonder geval zonder gevaar mijn bondgenoot kunt zijn! Ik heb u alleen van zes revolverpatronen beroofd, omdat ik het tooneeltje van zooeven wel voorzag!

—Gij wilt dus dat ik de bondgenoot word van een.…..?

—Zeg het maar, mijnheer Chesterton … van een inbreker! vulde Raffles kalm den zin aan. Gij beleedigt mij volstrekt niet als gij het zegt! Waarom ik inbreker ben geworden en hoe ik mijn beroep uitoefen, dat zijn natuurlijk zaken, waarmede gij u niet ophoudt; wij willen dat dan ook terzijde laten, en ik verzoek u alleen maar mij als eerlijk man te willen antwoorden op de vraag, of gij niet gelooft dat ik hier te New-York vrij groote diensten aan de politie heb bewezen.

Chesterton keek even zwijgend voor zich uit, en riep toen plotseling: Gij moogt zijn wie gij wilt—het is waar, en het zou onedel zijn om het te loochenen: gij hebt in de zaak tegen de Bende van het Kwade Oog onwaardeerbare diensten aan mijn vriend Flannagan bewezen! Zonder uw toedoen zou er nu waarschijnlijk nog geen enkel lid van die vreeselijke bende gearresteerd zijn.

—Het verheugt mij dat gij dit erkent! hernam Raffles droogjes, terwijl hij zijn grijze oogen met een koelen blik op Chesterton vestigde. Hoe gij over mij denkt laat mij trouwens onverschillig, de vraag is nu slechts of gij mij behulpzaam wilt zijn om den Moloch te ontdekken?

—Ja, dat wil ik, riep Chesterton eensklaps uit! Het kan mij niet schelen wat gij elders zijt; gij zijt een doodsvijand van de bende en dat is voor mij voldoende! Ik weet zeker dat Flannagan in mijn plaats juist zoo zou hebben gehandeld! En zeg mij nu wat uw plan is.

—Het is zeer eenvoudig, mijnheer Chesterton! Gij behoeft van uw kant niets anders te doen dan New-York te verlaten en een week weg te blijven! Niemand mag echter het flauwste vermoeden van uw heengaan koesteren!

—Met welk doel wilt gij mij wegzenden? vroeg Chesterton verwonderd.

—Ik wil uw plaats innemen! Gij zijt immers een vriend van de zeven heeren, in wier gezelschap gij dezer dagen in het Central Park een rit hebt gedaan met de lichtbeige auto van mijnheer Brain?

—Ja zeker, maar wat kan u dat voor nut zijn?

—Van meer nut dan gij denkt! antwoordde Raffles, ik beschik over middelen die boven uw begrip gaan en ik zie veel meer dan gij ooit zoudt kunnen zien. Inspecteur Flannagan valt natuurlijk buiten iedere beschouwing, maar de anderen moeten in mij Richard Chesterton zien—en de rest kunt gij aan mij overlaten.

—Maar dan is mijn hulp van negatieven aard! riep Chesterton teleurgesteld uit.

—Ik zou u gaarne een meer daadwerkelijk aandeel in de jacht doen nemen, hernam Raffles glimlachend, maar dat gaat nu eenmaal niet! En zeg mij nu op den man af of gij mij op die wijze helpen wilt.

Chesterton dacht een oogenblik na, een oogenblik was het alsof hij Raffles de hand wilde toesteken, hij bedacht zich, kreeg een kleur en zeide slechts:—Het is goed—ik zal vertrekken zonder dat iemand er iets van weet; ik weet niet hoe het komt, maar ik heb een gevoel alsof gij zult slagen.

—Ik dank u! zeide Raffles, wiens gelaat een oogenblik verstrakt was, toen de ander hem de hand wilde reiken en zich weder bedacht.

—Wanneer wilt u dat ik vertrek? vroeg Chesterton.[19]

—Aanstonds; liever over tien minuten dan over een kwartier!

—Gij blijft dus in mijn huis.

—Ja—maar gij kunt al het geld en al het zilverwerk meenemen!

Weer verspreidde zich een dieproode kleur over het gelaat van Chesterton, maar toen riep hij uit:

—Ik denk er niet aan om iets mee te nemen, ik vertrouw u!

—Zooals gij wilt! hernam Raffles koeltjes.

—Maar daar bedenk ik mij—gij lijkt in het geheel niet op mij.

—O! wees daar maar niet bezorgd over! Geef mij slechts een half uur en ik zal op u gelijken, en gij zult meenen, uw spiegelbeeld te zien.

—Maar dan zullen er twee Chestertons zijn!

—Daar behoeft geen vrees voor te bestaan! Ik zal mij hier in deze kamer verkleeden, gij trekt mijn overjas aan, zet mijn hoed op, neemt de tasch waarin ik het een en ander heb medegebracht, doet mijn grijzen baard en pruik aan en zet mijn gouden bril op! Ik zelf zal u wel uitlaten en als een der bedienden u ziet, zal hij toch het bedrog in dien korten tijd niet kunnen bemerken.

—En waar moet ik dan heengaan?

—Dat doet er niet toe, als gij slechts de stad verlaat en wat ver uit de buurt gaat. Gij kunt den baard en de pruik wegwerpen, of nog liever met een steen bevracht in het water gooien zoodra het duister is geworden. Maar wilt ge ze voor mij bewaren, zooveel te beter! Zorg echter dat gij naar een stad gaat waar men u niet kent en dat gij reist onder een valschen naam, dat is alles wat ik van u vraag.

Terwijl hij sprak had Raffles de deur op slot gedraaid, zoodat hij niet door een bediende verrast zou kunnen worden en opende nu het valies, waaruit hij achtereenvolgens eenige pruiken, wat valsche knevels en een doos kleurstoffen nam, benevens een kleine doos die een kapspiegel bevatte.

—Wees zoo goed zoo dicht mogelijk bij het raam te gaan zitten, zoodat uw gezicht helder verlicht wordt; het is een gelukkige omstandigheid dat ik ook grijze oogen heb, al zijn de uwe wat lichter.

Terwijl Chesterton voor het raam plaats nam, zette Raffles den spiegel op, ontdeed zich van zijn overjas, zette de pruik af, en begon zijn gelaat met de grootste zorg te grimeeren, waarbij hij telkens dat van Chesterton tot model nam.

En deze zag tot zijn verbazing, dat daar op tien passen afstand van hem een dubbelganger ontstond wiens gelaat tot in de kleinste bijzonderheden op het zijne geleek, dezelfde gebruinde tint, dezelfde fijne rimpeltjes naast de oogen, dezelfde fijngeteekende wenkbrauwen, hetzelfde kastanjebruine haar, dat aan de slapen begon te grijzen! Toen Raffles gereed was zeide hij:

—Nu zullen we van kleederen moeten verruilen! Ik moet alles van u hebben: uw boord, uw das, uw manchetten vanwege de knoopen, alleen uw laarzen niet, want ik zie dat de onze geheel aan elkander gelijken!

De beide mannen ontdeden zich van hunne bovenkleederen en daar zij van hetzelfde figuur waren pasten ze voortreffelijk.

De geheele gedaanteverwisseling had geen half uur geduurd. Met verbazing, bijna met schrik had Chesterton zijn dubbelganger aangezien, en zeide nu op fluisterenden toon:

—Ik dacht dat zoo iets onmogelijk was! Ik dacht dat iets dergelijks alleen maar in romans voorkwam! Of ik wil of niet—ik moet u mijn compliment maken.

—Dat kunt gij voor later bewaren, mijnheer Chesterton, zeide Raffles, terwijl hij Chesterton in zijn overjas hielp.

Hij bevestigde zelf den grijzen baard en de pruik, liet hem den bril opzetten, reikte hem hoed en valies toe, en zeide:

—Nu is het tijd!

Hij opende de deur voor Chesterton en bracht hem de gang door naar de voordeur, daargekomen zeide hij fluisterend:

—Sein mij uw adres, zoodra gij uw plaats van bestemming bereikt hebt.

Chesterton knikte bevestigend en het volgende oogenblik viel de deur achter hem dicht.[20]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK VI.
Een flauwe schemering.
Raffles keek Chesterton even na, en keerde toen naar de werkkamer terug van den man, wiens plaats hij had ingenomen.

Met behulp van de kleine werktuigen, welke hij had medegenomen, laschte hij snel den geleidingsdraad van de telefoon weder en drukte op den knop van de electrische schel, die boven op het blad van zijn schrijftafel was bevestigd.

Even later trad dezelfde bediende, die hem zooeven de buitendeur had geopend, het vertrek binnen.

Raffles opende niet dadelijk den mond, maar beschouwde aandachtig het gelaat van den man, om te zien, of zich daarop verwondering of een andere aandoening afspiegelde.

Maar de bediende stond daar rustig en onderdanig, in de correcte houding van den huisknecht van goeden huize.

Toen vroeg Raffles, de stem van Chesterton voortreffelijk nabootsend:

—Zie je niets bijzonders aan mij, Henry?

De bediende hief het hoofd op, keek zijn gewaanden meester even aan, en antwoordde toen:

—Als mijnheer het mij veroorlooft zou ik zeggen, dat hij een weinig bleek ziet—misschien heeft mijnheer niet goed geslapen?

—Dat is het geval! Ik heb een weinig hoofdpijn, maar dat zal wel weer overgaan bij een goede wandeling. Ik stelde je zooeven de vraag maar, omdat ik een nieuwe das draag, en je goeden smaak ten opzichte van heerenkleeding ken.

—Ik moet zeggen dat mijnheer een goede keuze heeft gedaan, zeide de bediende gevleid. De das staat mijnheer voortreffelijk.

—Ik ben blij dat je er zoo over denkt! hernam Raffles glimlachend.

Hij wreef even met de hand over het voorhoofd en hernam toen:

—Kun je je ook herinneren of ik afspraken heb, ik gevoel mij zoo dof vandaag.

—Voor zoover ik weet zou mijnheer om half twaalf een wandelrit gaan maken met de heeren Finn en Flannagan. Zij zouden u hier komen afhalen. Vanmiddag dineert mijnheer bij mijnheer Peter Vandyke en dan geloof ik dat mijnheer voornemens was vanavond naar de eerste voorstelling van Carmen te gaan.

Raffles had snel een en ander genoteerd op den vloeilegger die voor hem lag en zeide nu:

—Dank je, Henry—nu schiet het mij weer te binnen; zorg dat mijn paard op tijd gezadeld is en kom mij waarschuwen.

De bediende verliet het vertrek weder en Raffles bleef alleen.

—Als zelfs de bediende mij niet herkend heeft, bromde hij tevreden voor zich heen, dan kan ik gerust zijn! Alleen de tint schijnt nog een weinig te licht te zijn, maar dat is gemakkelijk te verhelpen, en wat zou ik nu doen? zoo zette hij zijn alleenspraak voort. Ik zal het vertrek nog verder onderzoeken dan ik vannacht heb kunnen doen, misschien geeft het onderzoek van de correspondentie mij een paar vingerwijzingen voor mijn gedrag, ik zal voorzichtig moeten zijn om mij niet te verspreken en misschien doe ik wel het beste deze interessante bleeke tint niet te veranderen, en mij een weinig ziek te houden, dan behoef ik niet zooveel te spreken. Het schijnt wel vast te staan dat Finn en Flannagan tot de bijzondere vrienden van Chesterton behooren, daar zij zeer vaak met hem uitrijden, en ik schijn ook in den huize Vandyke een gaarne geziene gast te zijn!

Raffles begon nu verscheidene laden van het bureau open te trekken, en hier en daar een blik in de brieven te werpen, welke Chesterton in den laatsten tijd ontvangen had.

Veel wijzer maakten zij hem niet, maar hij vond er althans aanwijzingen in die hem van nut konden zijn.

Om elf uur begaf hij zich naar de fraai ingerichte slaapkamer, waar de bediende het rijkostuum reeds had uitgelegd.

Raffles verwisselde van kleeding en hij was juist [21]gereed toen hij door het geopende raam voor de deur het getrappel van paardenhoeven hoorde.

Hij trad op het venster toe, en zag Finn en Flannagan, te paard gezeten, die lachend naar boven keken en hem toewenkten.

Raffles wuifde terug, ging de trappen af, en nam uit de handen van Henry een geruite pet en een karwats aan.

Toen hij de deur uitkwam zag hij daar reeds een prachtigen vosruin staan door een pikeur bij den toom gehouden.

Finn begroette hem met zijn gewone luidruchtigheid, en zijn kinderachtig lachje, maar Flannagan merkte op:

—Schort er iets aan, Richard? Je bent een beetje bleek!

—Hoofdpijn, mijn waarde, slecht en te kort geslapen! Let maar niet op me, het zal bij den rit wel overgaan!

Hij zette den voet in den stijgbeugel en was met een enkelen zwaai in den zadel.

—Kijk eens hoe lenig onze Richard wordt op zijn ouden dag, riep Finn met zijn onnoozel lachje, wie zou dat achter hem gezocht hebben, men zou meenen met een jongen van twintig jaar te doen te hebben. Raffles haalde de schouders op, maar hij begreep dat hij voorzichtig moest zijn en goed op zijn beweging moest letten.

Finn met zijn schaapachtig gezicht en zijn bête lachje, scheen meer op te merken dan hem lief was!

De drie mannen gaven de paarden de sporen en reden naar het Central park, waar het reeds zeer druk was, van ruiters en amazones, prachtige auto’s en sierlijke equipage’s.

Raffles sprak met opzet niet veel en stelde de kosten van het gesprek op rekening van zijn vrienden van het oogenblik.

Maar hij zette beide ooren goed open en er ontging hem niets van hetgeen de beide anderen zeiden.

Plotseling schrikte hij op en keek met ingespannen aandacht naar een naderende auto, een kleinen wagen, waarin twee mannen gezeten waren.

Hij had hen zelfs op grooten afstand onmiddellijk herkend, het waren Henderson en Charly Brand.

De reus zat achter het stuur, in een keurige livrei gekleed en Charly zat achterin, gemakkelijk achterover leunend, en als een dandy gekleed.

Naast hem zat een hond, die volkomen kaalgeschoren was—het was de beklagenswaardige Busto!

Charly hield het dier bij den halsband vast.

Reeds in de verte scheen de jonge man Chesterton herkend te hebben.

Raffles gaf hem een voor de anderen onmerkbaren wenk, waaraan de jonge man kon bemerken, dat hij Raffles voor zich had en dat de gedaanteverwisseling geslaagd was.

Een oogenblik was Raffles bevreesd dat Busto hem zou herkennen, en dat daardoor zijn geheele plan in duigen zou worden geworpen.

Gelukkig echter hield Charly het dier stevig aan den band vast.

En dit bleek wel noodig te zijn!

Want bij het voorbijrijden van het rijtuig begon de hond als een razende te blaffen en te rukken, in een wanhopige poging om los te komen.

Het dier liet al zijn tanden zien, en scheen aan een hevige opwinding ten prooi.

Maar Charly hield hem goed vast, daar hij zelve begreep dat hij zijn meester geen dienst zou bewijzen als hij den hond gelegenheid gaf, vroolijk blaffend tegen hem op te springen.

Maar ook de beide metgezellen van Raffles schenen het zonderlinge gedrag van den hond te hebben opgemerkt, die met de voorpooten op den rand van het portier was gaan staan, schor blafte, en zich bijna verwurgde in zijn pogingen om los te komen.

—Wat wil die hond toch van ons? riep Flannagan verwonderd uit.

—Ik geloof niet dat het op ons voorzien is, waarde Theodor! antwoordde Raffles schouderophalend.

—Dan heb je het mis, waarde Richard! schetterde Finn. De kaalgeschoren hond moet bepaald iets van ons hebben, een van ons drieën schijnt zijn misnoegen op te wekken, nu, ik ken het dier in het geheel niet, en ik behoef mij van zijn woede niets aan te trekken, hi, hi!

Het blatende lachje van den salongek irriteerde Raffles, zonder dat hij had kunnen zeggen waarom.

Natuurlijk had ook hij het vreemde doen van den hond opgemerkt, waarvan hij volstrekt niets begreep.

Vergissen kon hij zich niet, de hond blafte zoo woedend tegen hun ruitergroepje—maar waarom?

Vanwaar die woede, die zoo geheel ongemotiveerd leek?

Hij wierp een blik op het gelaat van Flannagan waarop niets dan verbazing te lezen stond, en vervolgens op het bolle onbeteekenende gelaat van Buster Finn, waarvan de lach nog niet geweken was.

Hij trachtte in de fletsblauwe oogen te zien maar [22]slaagde daarin niet, want de jonge man had zijn blikken reeds weder op iets anders gevestigd dat zijn aandacht trok.

Eensklaps hield Finn zijn paard in, wendde zich tot zijn beide metgezellen en zeide:

—Neem mij niet kwalijk, vrienden, daar reed een mijner vrienden voorbij, en het schiet mij te binnen dat ik hem een gewichtige vraag moest stellen, ik vind jelui wel terug bij de rotonde over een half uur.

En zonder antwoord af te wachten, wendde hij den teugel, drukte zijn paard de sporen in de zijde, en galoppeerde weg.

Raffles had zijn paard eveneens ingehouden en half doen wenden om den jongen man na te kijken.

—Waar wacht je op? vroeg Flannagan een weinig ongeduldig, ben je bang dat Finn van zijn paard zal vallen? Die vrees is overbodig, want ik ken weinig menschen die zoo voortreffelijk paardrijden en dat is vreemd genoeg voor zulk een verwijfd, salontype als onze vriend Buster is! Maar wat blijf je daar toch in gedachten staan, riep Flannagan ongeduldig!

—Neem mij niet kwalijk, zeide Raffles uit zijn gepeins opschrikkend, ik dacht aan iets.…..

Hij voltooide den zin niet, maar bracht zijn paard weder naar dat van den jongen inspecteur en reed verder.

Nadat zij ongeveer tien minuten zwijgend hadden voortgereden, begon Flannagan:

—Ik kan niet zeggen dat je erg spraakzaam bent Richard, moet ik dat alleen aan je hoofdpijn toeschrijven?

Raffles die in gedachten had voortgereden hief met een ruk het hoofd op, en zeide:

—Neem het mij maar niet kwalijk—ik weet, dat ik vanmorgen slecht gezelschap ben, vertel mij maar eens liever hoe het met je trouwplannen staat!

De oogen van den jongen inspecteur begonnen te schitteren toen hij antwoordde:

—Peter Vandyke heeft mij reeds gezegd, dat het huwelijk over twee maanden kan plaats hebben.

—Voortreffelijk, ik geloof dat je zeer gelukkig zult worden, want Cissy, zijn dochter, is niet alleen een heel mooi meisje, maar ze is ook moedig en verstandig.

Even scheen er een wolk over het gelaat van den jongen inspecteur te trekken.

—Van een ding zou ik zoo gaarne zeker willen zijn voor wij huwen! zeide hij.

—Wat zou je dan nu nog wel kunnen wenschen? vroeg Raffles.

—Ik wenschte dat wij den Moloch hadden gevonden, en de Bende van het Kwade Oog aldus den genadeslag hadden gegeven! zeide Flannagan op hartstochtelijken toon. Niet alleen zou ik dat wenschen in mijn kwaliteit van politiebeambte, maar ook, omdat ons leven nog altijd gevaar zal loopen, zoolang die ellendeling niet gevonden en onschadelijk gemaakt is.

—Wees maar stil, Theodor—ik ben er van overtuigd dat binnen een week, misschien wel binnen enkele dagen aan het bestaan van het Kwade Oog een einde is gemaakt, of dat haar althans een slag zal worden toegebracht, dien zij onmogelijk weer te boven zal kunnen komen.

Flannagan wendde snel zijn gelaat naar den spreker en keek hem verrast aan.

—Je zegt dat met een overtuiging alsof je er volkomen zeker van was, riep hij uit. Ik wilde dat ik jouw vertrouwen op dien gunstigen uitslag kon deelen.

—Ik blijf bij wat ik gezegd heb. New-York zal spoedig van dien geesel verlost zijn! hernam Raffles op beslisten toon.

—Als dat waar was, dan zou mijn geluk volkomen zijn! riep Flannagan uit.

Weer reden de beide mannen eenigen tijd zwijgend voort, maar plotseling begon Raffles:

—Vertel mij eens, Theodor, wat denk je van Buster Finn?

De inspecteur keek Raffles verwonderd aan, en herhaalde:

—Van Buster Finn? Hoe meen je dat in ’s hemelsnaam wel?

—Wel, wat weet je van zijn particuliere leven?

—Maar beste vriend,—hetzelfde wat jij er van weet! gaf Flannagan verbaast ten antwoord, Finn leidt het leven van alle rijke jongelui in een groote stad! Hij is een beste kameraad, maar geen hoogvlieger—eerder een beetje leeghoofdig, en voor zulke menschen is de keuze naar uitspanning tamelijk beperkt—even beperkt als de horizont van hun gedachten! Maar dat alles weet jij even goed als ik; je moet hem zelfs nog langer kennen dan ik! Je weet waarin zijn vermaken meestal bestaan—de wedrennen, het circus, de Variété’s, auto-ritje, de vrouwen, de wijn, en het spel! Dan houdt hij er nog een wapenverzameling op na, geloof ik, en hij heeft ook wel eens met postzegels geknoeid, maar andere liefhebberijen houdt hij er niet op na, waarom vraag je me dat eigenlijk alles?

—Omdat … begon Raffles aarzelend.[23]

Hij hield echter plotseling op en vroeg: Buster Finn komt immers veel in het huis van den Staalkoning?

—Hij is er als ’t ware kind in huis! Dat moet gij toch ook weten Richard?

—Maar hoe is het mogelijk, dat een meisje als Cissy behagen kan scheppen in het gezelschap van een man als Buster Finn? drong Raffles aan; hij is niet mooi, hij is niet geestig, hij lacht om de grootste flauwiteiten, hij kleedt zich als een fat, en hij is verbazend met zichzelf ingenomen!

Flannagan haalde de schouders op en antwoordde:

—Ik geloof dat het louter gewoonte is; zij kent hem reeds geruimen tijd en haar vader was nogal met hem ingenomen!

—Een zonderlinge voorkeur!

—Volstrekt niet zoo zonderling. Buster Finn is immers een neef van hem!

—Dat is waar ook dat had ik bijna vergeten! zeide Raffles op onverschilligen toon.

Het gesprek liep nu over andere zaken, totdat de beide ruiters de rotonde bereikten.

Zij wachtten daar geruimen tijd, maar toen zij Buster Finn niet zagen opdagen, keerden zij weder terug.

Zij zagen den jongen man nergens meer in het park, en daar het tijd werd voor den lunch, namen zij afscheid van elkander.

Raffles reed alleen weder naar het huis van Chesterton, diep in gedachten verzonken, en nu en dan ternauwernood ontkomend aan het gevaar van door een zware vrachtauto onderste boven geworpen te worden.

Hij gebruikte den lunch alleen in de kleine eetzaal van het fraaie huis, hetwelk zijn dubbelganger bewoonde en begon zich daarop te kleeden voor het bezoek aan Vandyke!

Maar al dien tijd bleven zijn gedachten bij het zonderlinge voorval in het Central Park.

Waarom—tegen wien had de hond zoo woedend geblaft?

Dat Busto tegen zijn eigen meester, ook al was hij vermomd, zoo nijdig zou blaffen, was ondenkbaar.

Flannagan stond boven iedere verdenking.

Bleef slechts over Buster Finn, de neef van Peter Vandyke.

—En toch, is dat wel mogelijk! bromde Raffles voor zich heen, is het geen krankzinnigheid om zoo iets te vermoeden, waar zouden die vermoedens mij heen voeren? De man die lid van de bende van het Kwade Oog is moet iemand zijn begiftigd met een buitengewoon helder verstand, een groote stoutmoedigheid en zeldzame doortastendheid—drie eigenschappen welke Buster Finn ten eenemale ontbreken. Hij is het toonbeeld van den onnoozelen salonheld, die al zijn aandacht wijdt aan zijn sokken en dassen, en die zich nooit met koud water zou wasschen!

En toch kon Raffles zich niet meer los maken van de gedachten die hem gevangen hielden, al waren zij krankzinnig, al leken zij te dwaas om er langer dan een seconde bij te kunnen stilstaan.

Maar waarom was Finn dan zoo plotseling weggegaloppeerd, juist toen de auto was voorbij gereden? Had hij werkelijk een vriend ontdekt?

Of wilde hij slechts de auto narijden om zich te overtuigen dat het blaffen van den hond per sé hem gold?

—Ik moet en zal dit raadsel oplossen! zeide Raffles vastberaden, toen hij de laatste hand aan zijn toilet had gelegd.[24]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK VII.
Het diner.
Het was omstreeks zes uur in den middag toen Raffles zich per auto naar het huis van Peter Vandyke in de vijfde avenue liet rijden.

Hij vond in de ontvangkamer slechts een klein aantal gasten, waaronder ook Flannagan en Buster Finn.

—Hoe is het met de hoofdpijn, Richard? vroeg Cissy op vriendelijken toon, terwijl zij den gewaanden Chesterton tegemoet trad om hem de hand te drukken. Theo vertelde mij zooeven dat je vanmorgen een weinig ongesteld waart!

—Ik dank je voor je vriendelijkheid—het is zoo goed als over! antwoordde Raffles.

—Zullen we je vanavond in de opera zien, Richard? vroeg Buster Finn.

—Ik weet het nog niet, Buster, antwoordde Raffles, het hangt geheel en al van mijn toestand af.

—Maar je hebt het ons beloofd! hernam Finn verwijtend, er is een nieuw ballet, weet je?

—Daar denkt Buster natuurlijk het eerste aan, riep Cissy lachend, de muziek komt voor hem pas in de tweede plaats.

Buster Finn liet zijn kinderachtig lachje hooren en wendde zich toen tot een jong meisje in een rose avondtoilet, om haar op zijn gewone stupide wijze het hof te maken.

Om half zeven begaf men zich aan tafel.

Er waren twaalf gasten, die aan een ronde tafel werden geplaatst in een der beide eetzalen.

Raffles had aan de eene zijde Cissy Vandyke, aan de andere het meisje in de rose japon naast zich.

Vlak tegenover hem zat Buster Finn.

—Het duurde niet lang of het gesprek liep over de jongste bedreigingen van de Bende van het Kwade Oog.

Richard maakte zooeven de opmerking, begon Flannagan, dat het bestaan van de Bende niet lang meer van duur zal zijn.

—En waarop grondvest hij die meening? vroeg Finn nieuwsgierig.

—Dat is het juist—op niets! antwoordde Flannagan lachend. Het is maar zoo’n idee van hem.

—Ik ben het niet met Richard eens! zeide Peter Vandyke hoofdschuddend. Zoolang men den chef niet in handen heeft—zoolang zal ook die Bende bestaan!

—Neem hem dan gevangen! gichelde Buster Finn.

—Je weet wel, dat wij daartoe alles in het werk stellen, Buster! zeide Flannagan op ernstigen toon. Maar die man beschikt over een geheimzinnige macht, welke het voor ons zeer moeilijk maakt, om zijn identiteit te ontdekken. Er zijn nu reeds twee huizen bekend, waarin hij zijn bijeenkomsten organiseerde, maar bij ons op het hoofdbureau van politie is men er vast van overtuigd, dat er veel meer van die huizen moeten zijn—misschien wel een paar dozijn—in geheel New-York verspreid. En al die huizen hebben hunne geheimen, die bezwaarlijk te doorgronden zijn, daarvan ben ik zeker.

—Nu, ik ben zoo vrij om het bestaan van dien Moloch in twijfel te trekken! ging Buster Finn voort, want zoo iets komt in onzen tijd niet meer voor!

Flannagan haalde de schouders op, alsof hij wilde zeggen—„je praat naar je verstand hebt”, en vervolgde:

—Die man bestaat even zeker als ik hier zit! En ik zal niet rusten voor ik hem onschadelijk heb kunnen maken!

—Haha! klonk het hooge lachje van Buster Finn, dan mag je er wel hulp bij halen, want ik wil je niet beleedigen, maar tot dusverre hebben je pogingen niet veel succes gehad, en wat er bereikt is—dat deed iemand die van rechtswege jullie doodsvijand moest zijn—John Raffles!

Er volgde een stilte op deze woorden, want alleen het noemen reeds van dezen naam had een soort verkilling teweeggebracht.

Toch sprak Finn niet anders dan de waarheid, want inderdaad had de Londensche gentleman-inbreker het leeuwenaandeel gehad in den zoo gelukkig gevoerden strijd tegen de bende.

Maar tamelijk spoedig werd het gesprek weder algemeen, [25]en men sprak zoowat door elkaar—tot Raffles plotseling een schok door zijn lichaam kreeg.

Zijn fijn gehoor had een klank opgevangen—een enkel woord slechts, dat door een der aanwezigen was uitgesproken, en dat een herinnering in hem wakker riep!

Hij had die stem eens in geheel andere, zeer gevaarlijke omstandigheden nogmaals gehoord—niet lang geleden!

Het was hetzelfde hooge geluid met denzelfden uithaal—misschien was zelfs hetzelfde woord nu wel gebruikt!

En voor zijn geest doemde het vertrek met het gazen scherm op.

Hij zag weer de tien mannen in hun pij met de kappen over hun hoofd—de lange tafel met het vuurroode kleed—en in den hoek het zwart gazen gordijn.

En hij hoorde weder duidelijk de eigenaardige falcetstem, blijkbaar veranderd, van den man, die achter dat scherm zat, en die hem zou hebben gedood, als hij niet door zijn beide vrienden gered was.

Hij liet zijn blikken over de gasten dwalen, in de flauwe hoop, dat het woord nogmaals zou weerklinken—dat zijn oor, dienzelfden klank nogmaals zou opvangen.

Maar het was vruchteloos.

Het gesprek werd op luiden toon gevoerd, en alle klanken liepen door elkaar.

Maar toen werd zijn aandacht getrokken door Buster Finn en zijn tafeldame, het jonge meisje in het rose costuum.

De hand van den jongen man lag op tafel, en zijn wijsvinger had zooeven vliegensvlug een klein figuur geteekend …

Daarop had hij een bliksemsnellen blik met zijn dame gewisseld en zich onmiddellijk tot zijn anderen buur gewend.

Het had maar even geduurd en in de blauwe schelvischoogen had het een ondeelbaar oogenblik geweerlicht.…..

Raffles voelde hoe zijn slapen klam werden—hoe zijn hart luider klopte—hij had die eigenaardige gewaarwording van den jager, die urenlang op zijn post in het bosch heeft gezeten, en nu ieder oogenblik verwacht, dat het lang begeerde wild onder schot zal komen.

Niemand zou naderhand goed hebben kunnen zeggen, wie er het eerst weder over begon—maar het duurde niet lang of men sprak alweder over de beruchte Bende.

—Ik houd vol, zeide Raffles op een zeker oogenblik, dat als de politie niet al te dom is, de Moloch binnen een week gevangen is! Daarover wil ik gaarne met iedereen die wil een weddenschap aangaan.

—Ik houd tegen, Richard! riep Buster Finn luidruchtig, terwijl hij zijn glas Rijnwijn ophief.

—Tot je dienst, Buster! kwam Raffles. Kom, laten wij er op klinken!

Hij was opgestaan en Buster had zijn voorbeeld gevolgd.

Over de tafel heen raakten de beide glazen elkander.

Maar Raffles stootte blijkbaar een weinig te hard—zijn glas brak—en het afgebroken glas maakte een diepe snede in de pink van Buster Finn.

Het bloed viel in dikke druppels op het tafelkleed.

—Duizendmaal excuus! stamelde Raffles. Dat was zeer onhandig van mij! Ik hoop toch dat ik je niet bezeerd heb, Buster?

—Wel, man—het heeft niets te beteekenen! riep Buster Finn uit en zijn schelle stem deed een siddering over het lichaam van den Grooten Onbekende loopen …

Die klank—was hem bekend!

Hij wist zich slechts met moeite te beheerschen, en ging weer zitten, terwijl Buster zijn zakdoek om zijn sterk bloedende pink had gewikkeld.

Men was het kleine incident spoedig vergeten en de maaltijd eindigde in groote opgewektheid.

Raffles had een paar kostelijke anecdotes verhaald en ook de gastheer had een paar verhalen gedaan, waarmee hij veel succes had gehad.

De heeren hadden zich naar de fraai ingerichte rookkamer begeven en de dames hadden zich verzameld in het boudoir van Cissy, waar het gelukkige jonge meisje haar vriendinnen ongetwijfeld zou onderhouden over haar uitzet.

Eenige heeren waren naar de biljard-kamer vertrokken, en daaronder waren ook Raffles en Flannagan.

Toen een partij beëindigd was nam Raffles den jongen inspecteur ter zijde en zeide op fluisterenden toon:

—Ken je dat meisje in het rose, de tafeldame van Buster?

—Een interessant gezichtje, nietwaar? Ik ken haar nog pas kort—zij moet een vreemdelinge zijn, en heeft op een liefdadigheidspartij met Cissy kennis gemaakt.

—Is Buster verliefd op haar?[26]

—Dat schreeuwt hij tenminste van de daken!

—Kent men de identiteit van het jonge meisje?

Inplaats van te antwoorden keek Flannagan den gewaanden Chesterton strak aan en zeide in de grootste verbazing:

—Wat bezielt je toch vandaag? vroeg hij eindelijk op zachten toon. Wat is er met je, Richard? Vanmiddag in het park, tijdens den wandelrit heb je het doopceel willen lichten van Buster Finn en nu praat je zoo vreemd over dat jonge meisje, dat zijn belangstelling heeft gaande gemaakt. Wat moet dat toch beteekenen?

—Misschien meer, dan ik je op dit oogenblik nog kan zeggen, Theodor, antwoordde Raffles op ernstigen toon. Je zoekt immers naar leden van de Bende? Neem dan een goeden raad van mij aan, en laat de gangen van het meisje in het rose in het geheim eens goed nagaan—maar zeer in het geheim, want je hebt niet met de eerste de beste te doen.

Flannagan wierp Raffles nogmaals een onderzoekenden blik toe en zeide toen:

—Als dat van jou niet al te dwaas zou klinken, zou ik bijna zeggen, dat je een weinig te ver bent gegaan in het proeven van den wijn van mijn aanstaanden schoonvader.

—Ik ben volkomen nuchter, Theodor, en ik verzoek je ook dringend niet aan mijn gezond verstand te twijfelen.

Op dit oogenblik kwam Buster Finn binnen met zijn gewone lawaai en riep reeds op den drempel van de deur:

—De heeren voor de opera worden verzocht zich gereed te maken! Over een kwartier komen de auto’s voor. Kom, Richard—wat sta je daar weer te beraadslagen met den man des gezags! Zet je queue weg en maak je gereed te gaan genieten van het nieuwe ballet.

—Wij komen aanstonds! riep Flannagan uit. Vergeet niet dien zakdoek van je pink te doen—het staat allesbehalve fraai. Cissy kan je wel aan een hechtpleister helpen.

—Ik zal er om denken, hi, hi! grinnikte de fat, terwijl hij wegliep!

Raffles keek hem eenige oogenblikken na en wendde zich toen opnieuw tot Flannagan.

—Luister eens, Flannagan! begon hij op zachten, maar dringenden toon. Ik heb je een verzoek te doen—en ik hoop van ganscher harte, dat je er gevolg aan zult geven, zonder mij al te veel te vragen.

—Wat dan wel? vroeg Flannagan verbaasd, en zelfs eenigszins verontrust door den ernst, waarmede de gewaande Chesterton had gesproken.

—Je gaat met Cissy, Peter Vandyke, Buster en nog eenige anderen naar de opera?

—Ja zeker! antwoordde Flannagan verbaasd. Jij bent toch ook van de partij?

—Neen, ik zal door hevige hoofdpijn verhinderd zijn.

—Daar begrijp ik niets van! mompelde de inspecteur. En nu je verzoek?

Raffles ging zoo dicht mogelijk bij den inspecteur staan, en fluisterde hem toe:

—Laat Buster Finn in geen geval tusschentijds vertrekken, niet voor dat de Opera geheel geëindigd is, dus omstreeks kwart over elf. Belet het hem tot iederen prijs om jullie te verlaten—desnoods met geweld!

—Wat zeg je daar? Man, je bent gek! stotterde Flannagan.

—Ik zeg je nogmaals, dat ik volkomen bij mijn verstand ben! Ik verzoek je dringend—houdt Buster Finn tot vanavond kwart over elf aan je zijde! En ik voeg er nogmaals aan toe—al moest je geweld gebruiken. Ik neem de geheele verantwoordelijkheid voor mijn rekening.

—Maar wat denk je dan? Wat vermoedt je dan? vroeg Flannagan, die zeer bleek was geworden.

—Ik denk dat ik op het spoor ben van den Moloch, meer kan ik nu niet zeggen! antwoordde Raffles. En nog iets, als Buster wil vertrekken, als de Opera gedaan is, laat hem dan gaan, en houdt tegen twaalf uur vannacht een honderdtal goed gewapende agenten gereed.

En nog vóór Flannagan van zijn ontsteltenis bekomen was, en nog iets had kunnen vragen, was Raffles verdwenen.[27]

[Inhoud]
HOOFDSTUK VIII.
Eindelijk.
Raffles had haastig afscheid genomen, een vreeselijke hoofdpijn voorwendend en had te voet het huis verlaten.

Hij wandelde een kwartier snel voort, en nam op een standplaats van huur-auto’s een taxi.

Hij gaf den chauffeur bevel hem naar Brooklyn te rijden, de voorstad van New-York, en noemde hem den naam van een voorname straat.

Daar steeg hij uit, betaalde, en ging te voet verder, tot hij een klein, fraai huis bereikt had, aan alle kanten door een tuin omgeven.

Hij liep het smalle tuinpad af en belde aan.

De deur werd geopend door Henderson, den reus.

Het gelaat van den trouwen chauffeur glansde van vreugde, toen hij zijn meester in de hem bekende vermomming zag.

—Mijnheer Brand is toch zeker thuis, Henderson? vroeg hij.

—Hij zit in de voorkamer en leest, Mylord!

Raffles trad het aangewezen vertrek binnen en dadelijk werd hij begroet niet alleen door Charly Brand, maar ook door Busto, die als dol tegen hem opsprong.

De twee vrienden drukten elkander krachtig de hand en daarop zeide Charly vol bewondering:

—Je vermomming is uitstekend geslaagd! Als ik vanmorgen in het Central Park je sein niet dadelijk gezien had, en dus wist, dat je geslaagd was, dan zou ik mijn eigen oogen niet geloofd hebben! Maar Busto scheen er anders over te denken, want die blafte vreeselijk tegen je!

—Dat was niet tegen mij, Charly, dat was tegen een der beide mannen, die in mijn gezelschap waren! Hij had den Moloch geroken!

Charly deed een paar stappen achteruit, en herhaalde, terwijl hij verbleekte:

—De Moloch? Maar dat is toch onmogelijk, je was in gezelschap van Flannagan en Buster Finn!

Raffles knikte.

—Buster Finn was het!

Charly gaf een schreeuw van verbazing.

—Maar als dat zoo is—dan is alles mogelijk! riep hij uit. Die ezel, dat hol klinkende vat, die onnoozele sukkel—het hoofd van zulk een misdadigersbende? Maar Edward, dat is toch ondenkbaar!

—Dat lijkt het slechts, mijn jongen! antwoordde Raffles op kalmen toon. Ken je die verhalen van „De Roode Pimpernel”? Sir Percy werd door zijn eigen vrouw voor een warhoofdigen sukkel, een ijdelen gek aangezien—en toch was hij de aanvoerder, de geniale chef van een Engelsche vereeniging, welker eenig doel was, de Fransche aristocraten uit de klauwen van Marrat en Robespierre te redden!

—Maar dat was een roman, Edward!

—Dat mag zoo zijn—maar een roman, die de werkelijkheid tot grondslag had! Want de zaak is werkelijk zoo gebeurd! Alleen de namen zijn veranderd. Welnu, die Finn kan wel een even voortreffelijk comediant zijn als Sir Percy—al erken ik, dat hij dan zijn rol speelt op een wijze, die een beroepsacteur bewondering zou afdwingen.

—Maar dan moet er onder dat onbeteekenende, slappe uiterlijk een ziel van een tijger, van een boosaardigen duivel huizen!

—Welnu? Dat is meer gezien! Vraag het iederen psychiater en hij zal je bevestigen, dat in bijna ieder mensch een tweeslachtige natuur heerscht, en dat dit bij sommige individuen buitengewoon sterk ontwikkeld is. Ik heb een blik in die waterblauwe oogen verrast, een blik, die nauwelijks een honderdste seconde duurde, maar die mij veel onthulde!

—Maar als je je vergist, Edward!

—Dan zou ik dat natuurlijk dadelijk toegeven! antwoordde Raffles. Ik geloof het echter niet. Toen je met den hond voorbijreed, heeft Finn den teugel gewend, en is je achterna gegaloppeerd! Heb je hem in het geheel niet gezien?

—Neen!

—Dan reed je auto te hard. Hoe het zij, ik weet, dat hij zich zekerheid heeft willen verschaffen en heeft willen zien, waar jullie bleven, om misschien wel den [28]hond te kunnen dooden, die een voortdurend gevaar voor hem moest opleveren, dien hij herkend heeft, ofschoon ik hem heb laten kaalscheren.

Hij wachtte even en ging toen voort:

—Ik ben hier gekomen om je te zeggen, dat ik mij zelf wil overtuigen of ik mij al of niet vergist heb. Finn is met Flannagan, Cissy en haar vader en een paar vrienden naar de Opera, en ik heb den inspecteur verzocht Finn tot iederen prijs vast te houden tot de Opera uit is.

—Waarom?

—Omdat ik in dien tijd zijn huis wil onderzoeken.

—Maar er zullen toch bedienden zijn?

—Natuurlijk. Hij heeft er drie, en ik weet niet of die leden van de bende zijn of niet, maar ik ben eerder geneigd om het laatste te vermoeden, dat is voor hem wel zoo veilig!

—Wil je ons beiden medenemen?

—Ja, ik zal jullie diensten wel noodig hebben! Maak voort, want het is reeds over half negen.

Enkele minuten waren de drie mannen in een huurauto gezeten, welke hen tot op een vijftigtal meters afstand van het huis bracht, hetwelk door Buster Finn bewoond werd.

Het was in een der oudste straten van New-York gelegen, niet groot, maar van een sierlijken bouwstijl.

Raffles belde aan en een oogenblik later werd de deur geopend door een grijzen bediende, die wel wat verwonderd naar de drie bezoekers keek.

De Groote Onbekende liet den man echter geen tijd om vragen te stellen, maar trad met zijn beide metgezellen de vestibule binnen, sloot de deur achter zich dicht en zeide:

—Je behoeft je niet te verontrusten, mijn vriend—je zult niets te vreezen hebben. Wij zijn van de politie.

De man verschrikte blijkbaar en stamelde:

—Politie? Maar wat komt gij hier in ’s hemelsnaam zoeken, mijnheer? Weet gij, in wiens huis gij zijt?

Raffles wilde antwoorden, toen een licht geraas in een naastgelegen kamer zijn aandacht trok—daar werd een telefoontoestel van den haak genomen.

Met een paar sprongen was Raffles bij de deur, rukte haar open, en zag een man in een donkere livrei in een half verlicht vertrek bij het telefoontoestel staan.

Hij wilde juist om aansluiting vragen, toen het geluid van de opengaande deur hem deed omzien.

Hij tastte naar zijn zak, maar hij was een onderdeel van een seconde te laat—Raffles had zijn revolver reeds op hem gericht, en beval kortaf:

—Handen op!

Charly, die achter Raffles was binnengetreden, trad vlug op den man toe, die hem met van haat fonkelende oogen aanzag en snel zijn zakken begon leeg te halen.

Onder de voorwerpen, die zich daarin bevonden, was een Browning en ook een soort wind-pistool, hetwelk met behulp van samengeperste lucht bijna geruischloos achter elkander die kogels kon afschieten.

—Bindt hem vast en knevelt hem, beval Raffles kortaf.

Juist toen Charly het bevel had opgevolgd, ging de telefoon opnieuw over.

Raffles sprong er op toe en greep het toestel.

—Hoe is de naam van dien kerel? vroeg hij op fluisterenden toon aan den grijzen bediende, die doodsbleek was binnen gekomen,

—Francis, mijnheer!

Nu ontspon zich snel het volgende gesprek:

—Met wien? klonk de stem van Buster Finn.

—Met Francis!

—Alles in orde?

—Alles!

—Waarschuw mij, als er soms bezoekers mochten komen!

—Het zal gebeuren.

—Ik kom om half twaalf terug—er zijn ernstige zaken te behandelen.

—Het is goed!

Raffles hing het toestel weder aan den haak en wendde zich tot den gebonden bediende:

—Zijt gij van plan ons in te lichten omtrent de identiteit van uw meester en aldus waarschijnlijk uw eigen vrijheid te koopen? vroeg Raffles.

Een verachtelijk schouderophalen was het eenige antwoord.

—Dat vermoedde ik wel! zeide Raffles kalm. Nu, dan zullen wij het zonder jouw voorlichting moeten doen!

Raffles trad nu op den grijzen bediende toe, die doodsbleek in een hoek was blijven staan, en zeide:

—Ik geloof aan uw gelaat te kunnen zien, dat gij volstrekt niets weet van het dubbelleven van uw meester.

—Ik weet volstrekt niets, mijnheer! jammerde de oude man. Ik begrijp volstrekt niet, wat er gaande is. Wat wilt gij eigenlijk van mijnheer Finn?[29]

—Dat zul je later wel zien, vriend! antwoordde Raffles. Is er nog een derde bediende?

—Ja, mijnheer, maar die heeft vandaag zijn uitgaansavond!

—Zooveel te beter! Ik geloof wel, dat gij part noch deel hebt aan hetgeen uw meester op zijn geweten heeft, maar ik zal toch gedwongen zijn u te beletten hem te waarschuwen!

Na zich te hebben overtuigd, dat de gebonden medeplichtige zich niet verroeren kon, geleidde Raffles den ouden man naar een kleine ontvangkamer achter in het huis gelegen, waarvan hij de deur op slot draaide.

—Ziezoo, zeide hij, nu kunnen wij op ons gemak de zaak eens onderzoeken, begon Raffles, zoodra de deur achter den ouden man gesloten was.

Aanstonds werd een aanvang gemaakt met een stelselmatig onderzoek van het geheele huis, maar, zooals Raffles wel verwachtte, kon hij niets ontdekken in de papieren en brieven, welke hij in en op de schrijftafel van Buster Finn ontdekte.

Als hij werkelijk de chef van de bende was, dan was hij sluw genoeg om in zijn eigen woning geen compromitteerende stukken te bewaren.

—Natuurlijk heeft de bandiet nog een andere woning, waar wij genoeg bezwarends zouden vinden! zeide Raffles teleurgesteld. Nu, dan schiet er niets anders over, dan dat wij kalm zijn terugkomst afwachten en zien, waarheen hij zich begeeft. Jij, Charly, hebt ongeveer dezelfde figuur als Francis, en je moet zijn rol overnemen—Henderson en ik zullen ons verbergen.

—En de oude bediende?

—Die blijft waar hij is—je moet maar zeggen, dat hij zich ter ruste heeft begeven.

Francis werd losgemaakt, van zijn livrei ontdaan, opnieuw stevig gebonden en gekneveld en in een zolderkamer opgesloten, waar Charly met de hulp van Raffles zijn gelaat zoo zorgvuldig mogelijk namaakte, en daarop de livrei aantrok.

Terwijl hij dit deed, vroeg hij op zachten toon:

—Ik zou wel één ding willen weten—als de bediende Finn waarschuwen wilde, dan moet hij op de hoogte zijn geweest van zijn identiteit! En ik heb altijd gehoord, dat niemand wist, wie de chef van de bende was?

—Deze man zal de eenige uitzondering zijn geweest, antwoordde Raffles. Het is ook wel begrijpelijk, dat Finn in zijn huis een vertrouwd persoon moest hebben, ingeval er gevaar dreigde!

Charly was nu gereed en nam plaats op de bank in de vestibule, en wachtte, terwijl Raffles en Henderson zich achter twee zware pilasters verborgen hielden.

Juist om half twaalf knarste de sleutel in het slot van de buitendeur, en Finn trad binnen.

Hij ging aanstonds op den gewaanden bediende toe en zeide kortaf:

—Maak je gereed, om mij naar de plek te rijden, Francis. Er is haast bij. Een voorgevoel zegt mij, dat er gevaar dreigt!

Zonder een woord te spreken, stond Charly op en verliet de vestibule.

Hij begreep, dat Finn gewend was zich door zijn vertrouwde naar de plaats van samenkomst te laten rijden.

Tot het laatste oogenblik had de jonge man getwijfeld, hij kón het niet gelooven, maar nu vielen hem eindelijk de schellen van de oogen—het ongelooflijke was waar—Finn, de man met het bleeke, onnoozele gezicht, de salongek, was inderdaad een hoogst gevaarlijk misdadiger!

Eenige minuten later had hij de auto uit de garage gehaald, en haar vóór het trottoir gereden.

Finn had meanwhile gone to his room and Raffles had that opportunity used to send Henderson out quickly, to get a rental car, who had to wait a hundred meters from the house.

Finn came back again, with a small suitcase — in which it probably was his black hood and some other objects he could need.

He walked through the vestibule, opened the front door, saw the car waiting and took its place.

Hardly had Raffles and Henderson heard the front door strike, followed by the honking of the car, or they in turn rushed out of the house and rushed to the waiting rental car.

— A pound tip, if you don't lose sight of that green car in front of us, but in such a way that it is not noticeable!

— Accord, sir! said the driver chuckling.

The chase started.

The car driven by Charly drove right through all of New York, the Brooklyn Bridge and finally stopped at the beginning of a narrow street.[30]

Finn got out, exchanged a few words with the man he was serving for looked at his familiar, and walked into the street.

Charly turned the car over, but then he jumped off the car, pressed against it the wall, pulled his cap over his eyes, and began to follow Finn, still thinking, that Raffles should be mistaken, and that the young man was looking for nothing here but some adventure.

The street ended in an uninhabited field, and suddenly it was as if Finn through the ground had sunk — he was nowhere to be seen!

Charly stamped with anger and disappointment, looked in all directions and then walked into the car that had followed his.

He informed Raffles softly what had happened to him, but the Great Unknown smiled and said:

— Buso is in the car! Now that we are on the trail of our man, he can do us no more escape! But we need police help because we can't know, how many the bandits are! Wait — I already see a police post there!

Raffles pointed to a red lantern, which indicated a few meters away that there was a police station.

He turned to the driver and said:

— Wait here for us in the same place, friend! You will not regret it.

And with those words, Raffles went to the police station, where he made a statement of his suspicions, making sure that he did not speak up.

He was provided with letters and tickets from Chesterton, and the sergeant on duty therefore did not doubt his identity for a second.

Fifteen minutes later, more than thirty officers were on their way, following the shaved Busto, kept on a leash by Raffles.

— Where does that dog take us, Mr Chesterton? asked the inspector, who had taken over the leadership of the small expedition in a surprised tone. He carries us to the open field. It is impossible for the guy to hide there.

— He is as sure there as anything! Raffles replied quietly. My dog is cheating not. If the man is not on the ground, he is under it.

The inspector gave a cry of wonder.

— That is not inconceivable, sir! he exclaimed. The ground here is under our feet indeed undermined. A few years ago, the beginning of a large tunnel under the Hudson, for the purpose of the underground railway, but an incomprehensible mistake took the direction wrong, and one had to after a month return to work and start again elsewhere. Sand was again covered over the tunnel roof, which had been completed over a length of almost sixty meters, as it would not pay the costs, to break the concrete tunnel again. But it I am incomprehensible how people would have managed to access it.

Busto would soon clarify this matter.

The animal brought the policemen to a very large pile of stones, and remained there standing there softly growling and sniffing.

— Here is the entrance! Raffles said simply.

— Yes, at this height I saw Finn suddenly disappear! Charly whispered.

The inspector glanced around.

He and his men were now in very large, desolate terrain, mainly consisting of sand and stones, and surrounded by a fence on three sides.

— It is not possible that many men have gathered here, because it would have been noticed! he said softly. The question is only — how do we get down here? It must be determined be a secret entrance.

— And a secret exit elsewhere too! Raffles added. There is only one drug — you must blow up that pile of stones. Below that is the entrance.

— But I don't have any dynamite! exclaimed the inspector.

—Ik wel, of althans iets dat er op gelijkt, zeide Raffles lakoniek. Ga wat achteruit, en storm dadelijk de trap af, zoodra de losbarsting heeft plaats gehad.

En zonder het antwoord van den inspecteur af te wachten, drong Raffles de agenten achteruit, haalde een zijner werpgranaten te voorschijn, en slingerde die met kracht tegen den hoop steenen.

Een oorverdoovende losbarsting deed zich hooren en een regen van steengruis daalde neder.

Door de stofwolk stormden de agenten vooruit, en wierpen zich in de gevormde opening.

Raffles greep den inspecteur op het laatste oogenblik bij den arm en zeide:

—Als uw man een snede in de pink heeft, dan is het de Moloch. Ik zelf heb hem vanmiddag die wonde met opzet toegebracht, om hem later te kunnen herkennen, in geval hij zich mocht vermommen.[31]

Terwijl de inspecteur zich op zijn beurt in den tunnelingang stortte, wendde Raffles zich tot zijn metgezellen en zeide op zonderlingen toon:

—Ik beschouw onze taak als geëindigd, vrienden! Ik wil niet afwachten, wat Finn zal zeggen, als hij mijn hond ziet. Dat zou wel eens gevaar kunnen opleveren. De auto wacht ons—het oogenblik om voorzichtig te retireeren is aangebroken.

Den volgenden morgen bevatten de bladen het relaas van de gevaarlijke arrestatie van Buster Finn, en tien zijner luitenants, die zich slechts na een bloedig gevecht hadden laten grijpen, hetwelk vijf dooden had gekost, en zeven zwaargewonden.

New-York mocht nu inderdaad hopen, van een afschuwelijke plaag verlost te zijn.

En dat wederom door toedoen van den gevreesden vijand der politie—den Gentleman-inbreker—John Raffles.

[Inhoud]
De volgende aflevering (No. 302) bevat:

Chesterton en Chesterton.[32]

[Inhoud]
In den
ROMAN-, BOEK- EN KUNSTHANDEL,
Singel 326, Amsterdam,

verschijnen wekelijks twee afleveringen, onderscheidenlijk van

RAFFLES

ook wel genaamd LORD LISTER, de gentleman-dief, in fraai gekleurden omslag.

22½ cents per nummer.

Elk nummer een afgerond verhaal.

NICK CARTER,

sensationeele detective-verhalen, in fraai gekleurden omslag.

17½ cents per nummer.

Elk nummer een afgerond verhaal.

BUFFALO-BILL.

De avonturen van den grooten woudlooper door hem zelf verteld

In fraai gekleurden omslag.

17½ cents per nummer.

Elk nummer een afgerond verhaal.

OORLOG AAN DEN OORLOG.

Actueele Roman door J. C. SCHRODER (BARBAROSSA) en C. BENIMA. In netten band en gekleurden omslag f 1.25.

Ook verkrijgbaar aan de Spoorwegen, Kiosken en door den Boekhandel.

Tegen inzending van het bedrag per postwissel franco toezending

Inhoudsopgave
I.	Wie is de Moloch?	1
II.	Een politieverslag.	5
III.	Verandering van tooneel.	8
IV.	Op Coney Island.	13
V.	Bij Richard Chesterton.	16
VI.	Een flauwe schemering.	20
VII.	Het diner.	24
VIII.	Eindelijk.	27
Colofon
Beschikbaarheid
Dit eBoek is voor kosteloos gebruik door iedereen overal, met vrijwel geen beperkingen van welke soort dan ook. U mag het kopiëren, weggeven of hergebruiken onder de voorwaarden van de Project Gutenberg Licentie in dit eBoek of on-line op www.gutenberg.org.

Dit eBoek is geproduceerd door het on-line gedistribueerd correctieteam op www.pgdp.net.

Metadata
Titel:	Lord Lister No. 301: Het einde van een schrikbewind	
Auteur:	Theo von Blankensee [Pseudoniem van Mathias Blank (1881–1928)]	Info https://viaf.org/viaf/8133268/
Auteur:	Felix Hageman (1877–1966)	Info https://viaf.org/viaf/5168161211441040070000/
Auteur:	Kurt Matull (1872–1930?)	Info https://viaf.org/viaf/56770919/
Illustrator:	Jan Wiegman (1884–1963)	Info https://viaf.org/viaf/65074834/
Aanmaakdatum bestand:	2023-05-19 19:43:13 UTC	
Taal:	Nederlands (Spelling De Vries-Te Winkel)	
Oorspronkelijke uitgiftedatum:	[1919]	
Trefwoorden:	Detective and mystery stories -- Periodicals	
Dime novels -- Periodicals	
Codering
Dit boek is weergegeven in oorspronkelijke schrijfwijze. Afgebroken woorden aan het einde van de regel zijn stilzwijgend hersteld. Kennelijke zetfouten in het origineel zijn verbeterd. Deze verbeteringen zijn aangegeven in de colofon aan het einde van dit boek.

Documentgeschiedenis
2023-05-16 Begonnen.
Verbeteringen
De volgende verbeteringen zijn aangebracht in de tekst:

Bladzijde	Bron	Verbetering	Bewerkingsafstand
1	[Niet in bron]	,	1
1, 2, 28	[Niet in bron]	.	1
1	tein	ten	1
2, 2, 5, 14, 14	terrier	terriër	1 / 0
2	kunen	kunnen	1
2	copiïsten	copiisten	1 / 0
2	Terrier	Terriër	1 / 0
3	intuschen	intusschen	1
4	Washington-Hotel	Washington Hotel	1
4	manie	manier	1
8	functionnaris	functionaris	1
9	twinstigste	twintigste	1
10	klauterparttij	klauterpartij	1
11	ruine	ruïne	1 / 0
12	gegalopeerd	gegaloppeerd	1
13	,	.	1
13	Coney-Island	Coney Island	1
16	.	?	1
17	grijs aard	grijsaard	1
17	schrik bewind	schrikbewind	1
20	HOOFDSoUK	HOOFDSTUK	1
20	naboosend	nabootsend	1
20	.	:	1
21	Flannagen	Flannagan	1
21	[Niet in bron]	:	1
21	acherin	achterin	1
21	achter over	achterover	1
21	gedaante-verwisseling	gedaanteverwisseling	1
23	flauwiteten	flauwiteiten	1
25	Duizenmaal	Duizendmaal	1
26	doodceel	doopceel	1
26	dat	dit	1
26	hecht pleister	hechtpleister	1
27	in in	in	3
31	zoggen	zeggen	1
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LORD LISTER NO. 0301: HET EINDE VAN EEN SCHRIKBEWIND ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:
• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.
• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.
• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.